.p1
{ht}Under Western Eyes
{pn}Part First
{cn}1
   To begin with I wish to disclaim the possession of those
high gifts of imagination and expression which would have enabled
my pen to create for the reader the personality of the man who
called himself after the Russian custom Cyril son of Isidor{ -- }Kirylo Sidorovitch{ -- }Razumov. 
   If I have ever had these gifts in any sort of living form
they have been smothered out of existence a long time ago under
a wilderness of words. Words as is well known are the great
foes of reality. I have been for many years a student and a
teacher of languages. It is an occupation which at length
becomes fatal to whatever share of imagination, observation and
insight an ordinary person may be heir to. To a teacher of
languages there comes a time when the world is but a place of
many words and man appears a mere talking animal not much more
wonderful than a parrot. 
   This being so, I could not have observed Mr Razumov or
guessed at his reality by the force of insight, much less have
imagined him as he was. Even to invent the mere bald facts of
his life would have been utterly beyond my powers. But I
think that without this declaration the readers of these pages will
.p2
be able to detect in the story the marks of documentary
evidence. And that is perfectly correct. It is based on a
document; all I have brought to it is my knowledge of the
Russian language which is perfectly adequate for what is
attempted here. The document of course is something in the nature
of a journal, a diary, yet not exactly that in its actual form.
For instance, most of it was not written up from day to day,
though all the entries are dated. Some of these entries cover
months of time and extend over dozens of pages. All the earlier
part is a retrospect, in a narrative form, relating to an event
which took place about a year before. 
   I must mention that I have lived for many years in Geneva.
A whole quarter of that town, on account of many Russians residing
there, is called La Petite Russie{ -- }Little Russia. I had a rather
extensive connection in Little Russia at that time. Yet I
confess that I have no comprehension of the Russian character.
The illogicality of their attitude, the arbitrariness of their
conclusions, the frequency of the exceptional, should present no
difficulty to a student of many grammars, but there must be
something else in the way, some special human trait{ -- }one of those subtle
differences that are beyond the ken of mere professors. What
must remain striking to a teacher of languages is the Russians'
.p3
extraordinary love of words. They gather them up, they
cherish them but they don't hoard them in their breasts; on
the contrary, they are always ready to pour them out by the
hour or by the night with an enthusiasm, a sweeping abundance,
with such an aptness of application sometimes that, as in the
case of very accomplished parrots, one can't defend oneself
from the suspicion that they really understand what they say.
There is a generosity in their ardour of speech which removes
it as far as possible from common loquacity. And it is ever
too disconnected to be classed as eloquence.-.-.-But I must
apologise for this digression. 
   It would be idle to enquire why Mr Razumov has left this
record behind him. It is inconceivable that he should have
wished any human eye to see it. A mysterious impulse of human
nature comes into play here. Putting aside Samuel Pepys,
who has forced in that way the door of immortality,
innumerable people, criminals, saints, philosophers, young girls,
statesmen and simple imbeciles, have kept self-revealing
records from vanity no doubt but also from other more
inscrutable motives. There must be a wonderful soothing power
in mere words since so many men have used them for self-
communion. Being myself a quiet individual I take it that
.p4
what all men are really after is some form or perhaps only some
formula of peace. Certainly they are crying loud enough for
it at the present day. What sort of peace Kirylo Sidorovitch
Razumov expected to find in the writing up of his record it
passeth my understanding to guess. 
   The fact remains that he has written it. 
   Mr Razumov was a tall, well proportioned young man, quite
unusually dark for a Russian from the Central Provinces. His
good looks would have been unquestionable if it had not been for
a peculiar lack of fineness in the features. It was as if a face
modelled vigorously in wax (with some approach even to a
classical correctness of type) had been held close to a fire till all
sharpness of line had been lost in the softening of the material.
.p5
But even thus he was sufficiently good-looking. His manner
too was good. In discussion he was easily swayed by
argument and authority. With his younger compatriots he took the attitude of an inscrutable listener, a listener of the kind that hears you out intelligently and then{ -- }just changes the subject. 
   This sort of trick which may arise either from
intellectual insufficiency or from an imperfect trust in one's
own convictions procured for Mr Razumov a reputation of
profundity. Amongst a lot of exuberant talkers, in the habit of
exhausting themselves daily by ardent discussion, a
comparatively taciturn personality is naturally credited with reserve power.
By his comrades at the St. Petersburg University, Kirylo
Sidorovitch Razumov, third year's student of philosophy, was looked
upon as a strong nature{ -- }an altogether trustworthy man. This
in a country where an opinion may be a legal crime visited by
death or sometimes by a fate worse than mere death, meant that
he was worthy of being trusted with forbidden opinions. He
.p6
was liked also for his amiability and for his quiet readiness
to oblige his comrades even at the cost of personal
inconvenience. 
   Mr Razumov was supposed to be the son of an Arch-priest
and to be protected by a distinguished nobleman{ -- }perhaps of
his own distant province. But his outward appearance accorded
badly with such humble origin. Such a descent
was not credible. It was indeed suggested that Mr Razumov
was the son of an Arch-priest's pretty daughter{ -- }which of course
would put a different complexion on the matter. This theory
also rendered intelligible the protection of the distinguished
nobleman. All this however had never been investigated
maliciously or otherwise. No one knew or cared who the
nobleman in question was. Razumov received a modest but
very sufficient allowance from the hands of an obscure
attorney, who seemed to act as his guardian in some measure.
Now and then he appeared at some professor's informal 
reception. Apart from that Razumov was not known to have
.p7
any social relations in the town. He attended the obligatory
lectures regularly and was considered by the authorities as a
very promising student. He worked at home in the manner
of a man who means to get on, but did not shut himself up
severely for that purpose. He was always accessible and there
was nothing secret or reserved in his life.
.p7
{cn}I
   The origin of Mr Razumov's record is connected with an event
characteristic of modern Russia in the actual fact: the assassination
of a prominent statesman{ -- }and still more
characteristic of the moral corruption of an oppressed society where the
noblest aspirations of humanity, the desire of freedom, an
ardent patriotism, the love of justice, the sense of pity and
even the fidelity of simple minds are prostituted to the lusts
of hate and fear, the inseparable companions of an uneasy
.p8
despotism.
   The fact alluded to above is the successful attempt on
the life of Mr de P{---} the President of the notorious
Repressive Commission of some years ago, the Minister of State
invested with extraordinary powers. The newspapers made
noise enough about that fanatical, narrow-chested figure in
gold laced uniform, with a face of crumpled parchment,
insipid, bespectacled eyes, and the cross of the order of St.
Procopius hung under the skinny throat. For a time, it may
be remembered, not a month passed without his portrait
appearing in some one of the illustrated papers of Europe. He
served the monarchy by imprisoning, exiling or sending to
the gallows men and women, young and old, with an equable,
unwearied industry. In his mystic acceptance of the
principle of autocracy he was bent on extirpating from the land
every vestige of anything that resembled freedom in public
institutions; and in his ruthless persecution of the rising
generation, he seemed to aim at the destruction of the very
hope of liberty itself.
.p9 
   It is said that this execrated personality had not enough
imagination to be aware of the hate he inspired. It is hardly
credible; but it is a fact that he took very few precautions
for his safety. In the preamble of a certain famous state
paper he had declared once that {op"}the Thought of liberty has never
existed in the Act of the Creator. From the multitude of men's
counsel nothing could come but revolt and disorder; and
revolt and disorder in a world created for obedience and
stability is sin. It was not Reason but Authority which expressed
the Divine Intention. God was the Autocrat of the Universe." . . . 
It may be that the man who made this declaration believed
that heaven itself was bound to protect him in his remorseless
defence of Autocracy on this earth. 
   No doubt the vigilance of the police saved him many
times; but, as a matter of fact, when his appointed fate overtook
him, the competent authorities could not have given him
any warning. They had no knowledge of any conspiracy against
the minister's life, had no hint of any plot through their
usual channels of information, had seen no signs, were aware
.p10
of no suspicious movements or dangerous persons. 
   Mr de P{---} was being driven towards the Railway
Station in a two-horse uncovered sleigh with footman and 
coachman
on the box. Snow had been falling all night making the
roadway, uncleared as yet at this early hour, very heavy for
the horses. It was still falling thickly. But the sleigh
must have been observed and marked down. As it drew over to
the left before taking a turn, the footman noticed a peasant
walking slowly on the edge of the pavement with his hands in
the pockets of his sheepskin coat and his shoulders hunched up
to his ears under the falling snow. On being overtaken this
peasant suddenly faced about and swung his arm. In an instant
there was a terrible shock, a detonation muffled in the multitude
of snow-flakes; both horses lay dead and mangled on the ground
and the coachman, with a shrill cry, had fallen off the box
mortally wounded. The footman (who survived) had no time to
see the face of the man in the sheepskin coat. After throwing
the bomb this last got away, but it is supposed that seeing a
lot of people surging up on all sides of him in the falling
.p11
snow, and all running towards the scene of the explosion,
he thought it safer to turn back with them. 
   In an incredibly short time an excited crowd assembled round
the sledge. The Minister-President getting out unhurt into
the deep snow, stood near the groaning coachman and addressed
them repeatedly in his weak, colourless voice, {op"}I beg of you
to keep off. For the love of God, I beg of you good people
to keep off." 
   It was then that a tall young man who had remained
standing perfectly still within a carriage gateway, two
houses lower down, stepped out into the street and walking
up rapidly flung another bomb over the heads of the crowd.
It actually struck the Minister-President on the shoulder
as he stooped over his dying servant, then falling between
his feet exploded with a terrific concentrated violence,
striking him dead to the ground, finishing the wounded man
and practically annihilating the empty sledge in the
twinkling of an eye. With a yell of horror the crowd broke up
and fled in all directions except for those who fell dead or
.p12
dying where they stood nearest to the Minister-President,
and one or two others who did not fall till they had run on a
little way. 
   The first explosion had brought together a crowd as if by
enchantment, the second made as swiftly a solitude in the
street for hundreds of yards in each direction. Through
the falling snow people looked from afar at the small heap of
dead bodies lying upon each other near the carcases of the
two horses. Nobody dared to approach till some 
Cossacks of a street-patrol galloped up and dismounting began
to turn over the dead. Amongst the innocent victims of the
second explosion laid out on the pavement there was a body dressed
in a peasant's sheepskin coat; but the face was unrecognisable,
there was absolutely nothing found in the pockets of its poor
clothing and it was the only one whose identity was never
established. 
   That day Mr Razumov got up at his usual hour and spent
the morning within the University buildings listening to the
lectures and working for some time in the library. He heard
.p13
the first vague rumour of something in the way of bomb
throwing at the table of the students' ordinary, where he
was accustomed to eat his two o'clock dinner. But this
rumour was made up of mere whispers, and this was Russia
where it is not always safe, for a student especially, to
appear too much interested in certain kinds of whispers.
Razumov was one of those men who, living in a period of mental
and political unrest, keep an instinctive hold on normal,
practical, everyday life. He was aware of the emotional
tension of his time; he even responded to it in an indefinite
way. But his main concern was with his work, his studies,
and with his own future. 
   Officially and in fact without a family (for the
daughter of the Arch-priest had long been dead) no home
influences had shaped his opinions or his feelings. He was
as lonely in the world as a man swimming in the deep sea.
The word Razumov was the mere label of a solitary
individuality. There were no Razumovs belonging to him anywhere.
His closest parentage was defined in the statement that he
.p14
was a Russian. Whatever good he expected from life would be
given to or withheld from his hopes by that connection alone.
This immense parentage suffered from the throes of internal
dissensions, and he shrank mentally from the fray as a
good-natured man may shrink from taking definite sides in
a violent family quarrel. 
   Razumov going home reflected that having prepared all
the matters of the forthcoming exam he could now devote his
time to the subject of the prize essay. He hankered after
the silver medal. The prize was offered by the Ministry
of Education: the names of the competitors would be submitted
to the Minister himself. The mere fact of trying would be
considered meritorious in the higher quarters; and the
possessor of the prize would have a claim to an administrative
appointment of the better sort after he had taken his degree.
The student Razumov in an access of elation forgot the
dangers menacing the stability of the institutions that give
rewards and appointments. But remembering the medalist of
the year before,Razumov, the young man of no parentage, was
.p15
sobered. He and some others happened to be assembled in their comrade's
rooms at the very time when that last received the official
advice of his success. He was a quiet, unassuming young
man: {op"}Forgive me"he had said with a faint apologetic smile and
taking up his cap. {op"}I am going out to order up some wine.
But I must first send a telegram to my folks at home. I say!
won't the old people make it a festive time for the neighbours
for twenty miles around our place." 
   Razumov thought there was nothing of that sort for him in
the world. His success would matter to no one. But he
felt no bitterness against the nobleman his protector, who
was not a provincial magnate as was generally supposed. He
was in fact nobody less than Prince K{---}, once a great and
splendid figure in the world and now, his day being over, a
Senator and a gouty subject, living in a still splendid but
more domestic manner. He had some young children and a wife,
as aristocratic and proud as himself. 
   In all his life Razumov was allowed only once to come
into personal contact with the Prince.
.p16 
   It had the air of a chance meeting in the little
attorney's office. One day Razumov, coming in by
appointment, found a stranger standing there{ -- }a tall, aristocratic-
looking personage with silky, grey side-whiskers. The
bald-headed, sly, little lawyer-fellow called out: {op"}Come in{ -- } come in, Mr Razumov," with a sort of ironic heartiness.
Then turning deferentially to the stranger with the grand air:
{op"}A ward of mine, your Excellency. One of the most promising
students of his faculty in the St Petersburg University". 
   To his intense surprise Razumov saw a white shapely hand
extended to him. He took it in great confusion (it was
soft and passive) and heard at the same time a condescending
murmur in which he caught only the words: {op"}Satisfactory" and
{op"}Persevere". But the most amazing thing of all was to feel
suddenly a distinct pressure of the white shapely hand just
before it was withdrawn: a light pressure like a
secret sign. The emotion of it was terrible. Razumov's
heart seemed to leap into his throat. When he raised his
.p17
eyes the aristocratic personage, motioning the little lawyer
aside, had opened the door and was going out. 
   The attorney rummaged amongst the papers on his desk for
a time. {op"}Do you know who that was?" he asked suddenly. 
   Razumov, whose heart was thumping hard yet, shook his
head in silence. 
   {op"}That was Prince K{---}. You wonder what he could be doing
in the hole of a poor legal rat like myself{ -- }eh? These
awfully great people have their sentimental curiosities like common
sinners. But if I were you, Kirylo Sidorovitch" he
continued, leering and laying a peculiar emphasis on the
patronymic, {op"}I wouldn't boast at large of the introduction. It
would not be prudent, Kirylo Sidorovitch. O dear no! It
would be in fact dangerous for your future." 
   The young man's ears burned like fire; his sight was dim.
{op"}That man!" Razumov was saying to himself. {op"}He!" 
   Henceforth it was by this monosyllable that Mr Razumov
got into the habit of referring mentally to the stranger with
.p18
grey silky side-whiskers. From that time too, when walking in
the more fashionable quarters, he noted with interest the
magnificent horses and carriages with Prince K{---}'s liveries
on the box. Once he saw the Princess{ -- }she was shopping{ -- } 
get out, followed by two girls of which one was nearly a head
taller than the other. Their fair hair hung loose down
their backs in the English style; they had merry eyes, their
coats, muffs and little fur-caps were exactly alike, and their
cheeks and noses were tinged a cheerful pink by the frost.
They crossed the pavement in front of him and Razumov went on his
way smiling shyly to himself. {op"}His" daughters. They
resembled {op"}Him". The young man felt a glow of warm
friendliness towards these girls who would never know of his
existence. Presently they would marry Generals or Kammerherrs
and have girls and boys of their own, who perhaps would be
aware of him as a celebrated old professor, decorated,
possibly a Privy Councillor, one of the glories of Russia{ -- } 
nothing more! 
   But a celebrated professor was a somebody. Distinction
.p19
would convert the label Razumov into an honoured name. There
was nothing strange in the student Razumov's wish for
distinction. A man's real life is that accorded to him in the
thoughts of other men by reason of respect or natural love.
Returning home on the day of the attempt on Mr de P{---}'s life
Razumov resolved to have a good try for the Silver
medal. 
   Climbing slowly the four flights of the dark, dirty
staircase in the house where he had his lodgings, he felt
confident of success. The winner's name would be published
in the papers on New Year's day. And at the thought that {op"}he"
would most probably read it there, Razumov stopped short on the
stairs for an instant, then went on smiling faintly at his own
emotion. {op"}This is but a shadow", he said to himself, {op"}but
the medal is a solid beginning." 
   With those ideas of industry in his head the warmth of
his room was agreeable and encouraging. {op"}I shall put in
four hours of good work" he thought. But no sooner had he
.p20
closed the door than he was horribly startled. All black
against the usual tall stove of white tiles gleaming in the
dusk, stood a strange figure wearing a skirted, close-fitting, brown
cloth coat strapped round the waist, in long boots and
with a little Astrachan cap on its head. It loomed lithe
and martial. Razumov was utterly confounded. It was only
when the figure advancing two paces asked in an untroubled
grave voice if the outer door was closed, that he regained
his power of speech.
   {op"}Haldin! . . . . .  Victor Victorovitch! . . . .  Is that you?. . . 
Yes. The outer door is shut all right. But this is indeed 
unexpected."
   Victor Haldin, a student older than most of his
contemporaries at the University, was not one of the industrious set.
He was hardly ever seen at lectures; the authorities had
marked him as {op"}restless" and {op"}unsound"{ -- }very bad notes.
But he had a great personal prestige with his comrades and
influenced their thoughts. Razumov had never been intimate
.p21
with him. They had met from time to time at gatherings in other
students' houses. They had even had a discussion together{ -- } 
one of those discussions on first principles dear to the
sanguine minds of youth. 
   Razumov wished the man had chosen some other time to
come for a chat. He felt in good trim to tackle the prize
essay. But as Haldin could not be slightingly dismissed
Razumov adopted the tone of hospitality, asking him to sit
down and smoke. 
   {op"}Kirylo Sidorovitch", said the other, {op"}we are not perhaps
in exactly the same camp. Your judgment is more
philosophical. You are a man of few words, but I havn't met
anybody who dared to doubt the generosity of your sentiments.
There is a solidity about your character which cannot exist
without courage." 
   Razumov felt flattered and began to mutter shyly
something about being very glad of his good opinion, when
Haldin raised his hand. 
   {op"}This is what I was saying to myself," he continued, {op"}as
.p22
I dodged in the woodyard down by the river side. {op'}He has a
strong character this young man' I said to myself. {op'}He
does not throw his soul to the winds. Your reserve has
always fascinated me, Kirylo Sidorovitch. So I tried to
remember your address. But look here{ -- }it was a piece of luck.
Your dvornik was away from the gate talking to a sleigh-
driver on the other side of the street. I met no one on the
stairs, not a soul. As I came up to your floor I caught sight
of your landlady coming out of your rooms. But she did not
see me. She crossed the landing to her own side, and then I
slipped in. I have been here two hours expecting you to
come in every moment." 
   Razumov had listened in astonishment; but before he
could open his mouth Haldin added, speaking deliberately; 
   {---}{op"}It was I who removed de P{---} this morning." 
   Razumov kept down a cry of dismay. The sentiment of his
life being utterly ruined by this contact with such a crime
expressed itself quaintly by a sort of half derisive mental
.p23
exclamation: {op"}There goes my Silver Medal!" 
   Haldin continued after waiting a while: 
   {op"}You say nothing, Kirylo Sidorovitch! I understand
your silence. To be sure I cannot expect you with your
frigid English manner to embrace me. But never mind your
manners. You have enough heart to have heard the sound of
weeping and gnashing of teeth this man raised in the land.
That would be enough to get over any philosophical hopes. He
was uprooting the tender plant. He had to be stopped. He
was a dangerous man{ -- }a convinced man. Three more years of his
work would have put us back fifty years into bondage{ -- }and
look at all the lives wasted, at all the souls lost in that time." 
   His curt self-confident voice suddenly lost its ring and
it was in a dull tone that he added, {op"}Yes, brother. I have
killed him. It's weary work." 
   Razumov had sunk into a
chair. Every moment he expected a crowd of policemen to rush
in. There must have been thousands of them out looking for
that man walking up and down in his room. Haldin was talking
.p24
again in a restrained, steady voice. Now and then he
flourished an arm, slowly, without excitement. 
   He told Razumov how he had brooded for a year; how he
had not slept properly for weeks. He and {op"}Another" had a
warning of the Minister's movements from {op"}a certain person"
late the evening before. He and that {op"}Another" prepared
their {op"}engines" and resolved to have no sleep till {op"}the deed"
was done. They walked the streets under the falling snow with
the {op"}engines" on them, exchanging not a word the livelong
night. When they happened to meet a police patrol they took
each other by the arm and pretended to be a couple of peasants
on the spree. They reeled and talked in drunken, hoarse
voices. Except for these strange outbreaks they kept silence,
moving on ceaselessly. Their plans had been previously
arranged. At daybreak they made their way to the spot which they
knew the sledge must pass. When it appeared in sight they
exchanged a muttered good-bye and separated. The {op"}other"
remained at the corner, Haldin took up a position a little
further up the street. . . . 
.p25 
   After throwing his {op"}engine" he ran off and in a moment
was overtaken by the panic-struck people flying away from
the spot after the second explosion. They were
wild with terror. He was jostled once
or twice. He slowed down for the rush to pass him and then
turned to the left into a narrow street. There he was alone. 
   He marvelled at this immediate escape. The work was
done. He could hardly believe it. He fought with an almost
irresistible longing to lie down on the pavement and sleep.
But this sort of faintness{ -- }a drowsy faintness{ -- }passed off
quickly. He walked faster, making his way to one of the
poorer parts of the town in order to look up Ziemianitch. 
   This Ziemianitch, Razumov understood, was a sort of
town-peasant who had got on; owner of a small number of
sledges and horses for hire. Haldin paused in his narrative
to exclaim:  
   {op"}A bright spirit! A hardy soul! The best driver in
St. Petersburg. He has a team of three horses there . . .  Ah!
He's a fellow!"
.p26 
   This man had declared himself willing to take out
safely at any time, one or two persons to the second or
third railway station on one of the southern lines. But there
had been no time to warn him the night before. His usual
haunt seemed to be a low class eating house on the outskirts
of the town. When Haldin got there the man was not to be
found. He was not expected to turn up again till the evening.
Haldin wandered away restlessly. 
   He saw the gate of a woodyard open and went in to get out
of the wind which swept the bleak broad thoroughfare. The
great rectangular piles of cut wood loaded with snow
resembled the huts of a village. At first the watchman who
discovered him crouching amongst them talked in a friendly
manner. He was a dried up old man wearing two ragged army
coats one over the other; his wizened little face, tied up under
the jaw and over the ears in a dirty red handkerchief,
looked comical. Presently he grew sulky and then all at once
without rhyme or reason began to shout furiously. 
   {op"}Aren't you ever going to clear out of this, you loafer?
.p27
We know all about factory hands of your sort. A big, strong,
young chap! You aren't even drunk. What do you want here?
You don't frighten us. Take yourself and your ugly eyes
away." 
   Haldin stopped before the sitting Razumov. His supple
figure with the white forehead above which the fair hair
stood straight up, had an aspect of lofty daring. 
   {op"}He did not like my eyes" he said. {op"}And so. . . .  here
I am." 
   Razumov made an effort to speak calmly. 
   {op"}But pardon me, Victor Victorovitch. We know each
other so little. . . . .  I don't see why you . . . ?" 
   {op"}Confidence," said Haldin. 
   This word sealed Razumov's lips as if a hand had been
clapped on his mouth. His brain seethed with arguments. 
   {op"}And so{ -- }here you are", he muttered through his teeth. 
   The other did not detect the tone of anger. Never 
suspected it. 
   {op"}Yes. And nobody knows I am here. You are the last
.p28
person that could be suspected{ -- }should I get caught. That's
an advantage, you see. And then{ -- }speaking to a superior
mind like yours I can well say all the truth. It occurred to
me that you{ -- }you have no one belonging to you{ -- }no ties, no
one to suffer for it if this came out by some means. There
have been enough ruined Russian homes as it is. But I don't
see how my passage through your rooms can be ever known. If
I should be got hold of I'll know how to keep silent{ -- }no matter
what they may be pleased to do to me," he added grimly. 
   He began to walk again while Razumov sat still appalled. 
   {op"}You thought that," he faltered out almost sick with
indignation. 
   {op"}Yes, Razumov. Yes, brother. Some day you shall help
to build. You suppose that I am a terrorist, now{ -- }a
destructor of what is. But consider that the true destructors
are they who destroy the spirit of progress and truth, not they
who merely kill the bodies of persecutors of human dignity.
Men like me are necessary to make room for men like you. Well,
.p29
we have made the sacrifice of our lives, but all the same
I want to escape if it can be done. It is not my life I want
to save, but my power to do. I won't live idle. Oh no!
Don't make any mistake, Razumov. Men like me are rare. And
besides, an example like this is more awful to oppressors
when the perpetrator vanishes without a trace. They sit in
their offices and palaces and quake. All I want you to do is
to help me to vanish. No great matter that. Only to go
by and by and see Ziemianitch for me at that place where I went
this morning. Just tell him {op'}He whom you know wants a one-
horse sledge to pull up half an hour after midnight, at the
seventh lamp-post on the left counting from the upper end of
Karabelnaia. If nobody gets in, the sledge is to run round
a block or two, so as to come back past the same spot in ten
minutes time.'" 
   Razumov wondered why he had not cut short that talk and
told this man to go away long before. Was it weakness or what? 
   He concluded that it was a sound instinct. Haldin must
have been seen. It was impossible that some people should not
.p30
have noticed the face and appearance of the man who threw the
bomb. Haldin was a noticeable person. The police in their
thousands must have had his description within the hour. With
every moment the danger grew. Sent out to wander in the streets
he could not escape being caught in the end. 
   The police would very soon find out all about him. They
would set about discovering a conspiracy. Everybody Haldin
had ever known would be in the greatest danger. Unguarded
expressions, little facts in themselves innocent would be
counted for crimes. Razumov remembered certain words he said,
the speeches he had listened to, the harmless gatherings he had
attended{ -- }it was almost impossible for a student to keep out of
that sort of thing, without becoming suspect to his comrades. 
   Razumov saw himself shut up in a fortress, worried,
badgered, perhaps ill-used. He saw himself deported by an
administrative order, his life broken, ruined and robbed of all hope. He
saw himself{ -- }at best{ -- }leading a miserable existence under
police supervision, in some small, far-away provincial town,
without friends to assist his necessities or even take any steps
.p31
to alleviate his lot{ -- }as others had. Others had fathers,
mothers, brothers, relations, connections, friends to move
heaven and earth on their behalf{ -- }he had no one. The very
officials that sentenced him some morning would forget his
existence before sunset. 
   He saw his youth pass away from him in misery and half
starvation{ -- }his strength give way, his mind become an abject
thing. He saw himself creeping broken down and shabby, about
the streets{ -- }dying unattended in some filthy hole of a room,
or on the sordid bed of a Government hospital. 
   He shuddered. Then a sort of bitter calmness came over
him. It was best to keep this man out of the streets till he
could be got rid of with some chance of escaping. That was the
best that could be done. Razumov of course felt the safety of
his lonely existence to be permanently endangered. This
evening's doings could turn up against him at any time as long
as this man lived and the present institutions endured. They
appeared to him rational and indestructible at that moment.
They had a force of harmony{ -- }in contrast with the horrible
.p32
discord of this man's presence. He hated the man. He
said quietly: 
   {op"}Yes. Of course I will go. You must give me precise
directions, and for the rest{ -- }depend on me." 
   {op"}Ah! You are a fellow! Collected{ -- }cool as a 
cucumber. A regular Englishman. Where did you get your
soul from? There aren!t many like you. Look here,
brother! Men like me leave no posterity but their souls
are not lost. No man's soul is ever lost. It works for
itself{ -- }or else where would be the sense of self-sacrifice,
of martyrdom, of conviction, of faith{ -- }the labours of the
soul. What will become of my soul when I die in the way I
must die{ -- }soon{ -- }very soon perhaps? It shall not perish.
Don't make a mistake, Razumov. This is not murder{ -- }it is
war, war. My spirit shall go on warring in some Russian
body till all falsehood is swept out of the world. The
modern civilisation is false but a new revelation shall come
out of Russia. Ha! you say nothing. You are a sceptic.
I respect your philosophical scepticism, Razumov, but don't
.p33
touch the soul. The Russian soul that lives in all of us.
It has a future. It has a mission, I tell you, or else why
should I have been moved to do this{ -- }reckless{ -- }like a
butcher{ -- }in the middle of all these innocent people{ -- } 
scattering death{ -- }I! I! . . . .  I wouldn't hurt a fly!" 
   {op"}Not so loud," warned Razumov harshly. 
   Haldin sat down abruptly and leaning his head on his
folded arms burst into tears. He wept for a long time. The
dusk had deepened in the room. Razumov, motionless in
sombre wonder, listened to the sobs. 
   The other raised his head, got up and with an effort
mastered his voice. 
   {op"}Yes. Men like me leave no posterity," he repeated in a
subdued tone. {op"}I have a sister though. She's with my old
mother{ -- }I persuaded them to go abroad this year{ -- }thank God.
Not a bad little girl{ -- }my sister. She has the most trustful
eyes of any human being that ever walked this earth. She
will marry well I hope. She may have children{ -- }sons perhaps.
.p34
Look at me. My father was a Government official in the
provinces. He had a little land too. A simple servant of
God{ -- }: a true Russian in his way.  His was the soul of obedience.
But I am not like him. They say I resemble my
mother's eldest brother, an officer. They shot him in '28.
Under Nicholas, you know. Haven't I told you that this is war,
war . . . .  But God of Justice! This is weary work." 
   Razumov in his chair leaning his head on his hand spoke
as if from the bottom of an abyss. 
   {op"}You believe in God, Haldin?" 
   {op"}There you go: catching at
words that are wrung from one. What does it matter? What
was it the Englishman said: {op'}There is a divine soul in things . . . '
Devil take him{ -- }I don't remember now. But he spoke the
truth. When the day of you thinkers comes don't you forget
what's divine in the Russian soul{ -- }and that's resignation.
Respect that in your intellectual restlessness and don't let your
arrogant wisdom spoil its message to the world. I am speaking to
you now like a man with a rope round his neck. What do you
.p35
imagine I am? A being in revolt? No. It's you thinkers
who are in everlasting revolt. I am one of the resigned.
When the necessity of this heavy work came to me and I
understood that it had to be done{ -- }what did I do? Did I exult?
Did I take pride in my purpose? Did I try to weigh its worth
and consequences? No! I was resigned. I thought {op'}God's
will be done.'" 
   He threw himself full length on Razumov's bed and putting
the backs of his hands over his eyes remained perfectly
motionless and silent. Not even the sound of his breathing could be
heard. The dead stillness of the room remained undisturbed till
in the darkness Razumov said in a gloomy murmur: 
   {op"}Haldin." 
   {op"}Yes," answered the other readily, quite invisible now on
the bed and without the slightest stir. 
   {op"}Isn't it time for me to start?" 
   {op"}Yes, brother." The other was heard, lying still in the
darkness as though he were talking in his sleep. {op"}The time has
come to put fate to the test."
.p36
he paused, then gave a few lucid directions in the
quiet impersonal voice of a man in a trance. Razumov made
ready without a word of answer. As he was leaving the room
the voice on the bed said after him:
   {op"}Go with God, thou silent soul."
On the landing, moving softly, Razumov locked the door
and put the key in his pocket.
.p37
{ti}Razumov.
{pt}First
{cn}II
   The words and events of that evening must have been graven as if
with a steel tool on Mr. Razumov's brain since he was able to write his
relation with such fulness and precision a good many months
afterwards.
   The record of the thoughts which assailed him in the street is even
more minute and abundant. They seem to have rushed upon him with the
greater freedom because his thinking powers were no longer crushed
by Haldin's presence{ -- }the appalling presence of a great crime and the
stunning force of a great fanaticism. On looking through the pages
of Mr. Razumov's diary I own that a {op"}rush of thoughts" is not an
adequate image. 
   The more adequate description would be a tumult of thoughts{ -- }the
faithful reflection of the state of his feelings. The thoughts in
themselves were not numerous{ -- }they were like the thoughts of most
human beings few and simple{ -- }but they cannot be reproduced here in
all their exclamatory repetitions which went on in a long and weary
turmoil{ -- }for the walk was long. 
   If to the western reader they appear shocking , inappropriate or
even improper it must be remembered that as to the first this may be
the effect of my crude statement. For the rest I will only remark here
that this is not a story of the West of Europe.
.p38
Nations it may be have fashioned their governments but the
governments have paid them back in the same coin. It is unthinkable that
any young Englishman should find himself in Razumov's situation. This
being so it would be a vain enterprise to imagine what he would think.
The only safe surmise to make is that he would not think as Mr.
Razumov thought at this crisis of his fate. He would not have a
hereditary and personal knowledge of the means by which a historical
autocracy represses ideas,guards its power and defends its existence.
By an act of mental extravagance he might imagine himself arbitrarily
thrown into prison,but it would never occur to him unless he were
delirious (and perhaps not even then) that 
he could be beaten with whips as a practical measure either of
investigation or of punishment. 
   This is but a crude and unsubtle example of the different
conditions of western thought. I don't know that this danger occurred,
specially to Mr. Razumov. No doubt it entered unconsciously into the
general dread and the general appallingness of this crisis. Razumov
as has been seen above was aware of more subtle ways in which an
individual may be undone by the proceedings of a despotic government.
A simple expulsion from the University{ -- }(the very least that could
happen to him) with an impossibility to continue his studies
anywhere,was enough to ruin utterly a young man depending entirely
upon the development of his natural abilities for his place in the world.
He was a Russian : and for him to be found out meant simply sinking
into the lowest social depths amongst the hopeless and the destitute
.p39
{ -- }the night birds of the city. 
   The peculiar circumstances of Razumov's parentage,or rather of
his no-parentage,should be taken into the account of his
thoughts. And he remembered them too. He had been lately reminded
of them in a peculiarly atrocious way by this fatal Haldin.
{op"}Because I haven't that, must everything else be taken away from
me," he thought. 
   He nerved himself for another effort to go on. Along the roadway
sledges glided phantom-like and jingling through a fluttering whiteness
.p40
on the black face of the night. {op"}For it is a crime," he
was saying to himself. {op"}A murder is a murder. Though of course some
sort of liberal institutions . . . . . " 
   A feeling of horrible sickness came over him. {op"}I must be courageous,"
he exhorted himself mentally. All his strength was suddenly gone as if taken
out by a hand. Then by a mighty effort of will it came back because
he was afraid of fainting in the street and being picked up by the
police with the key of his lodgings in his pocket. They would find
Haldin there, and then indeed he would be undone. 
   Strangely enough it was this fear which seems to have kept him
up to the end. The passers by were rare. They came upon him
suddenly looming up black in the snowflakes close by, then, vanishing all
at once{ -- }without footfalls. 
   It was the quarter of the very poor. Razumov noticed an elderly
woman tied up in ragged shawls. Under the street lamp she seemed a
beggar off duty. She walked leisurely in the blizzard as though she
had no home to hurry to,she hugged under one arm a round loaf of
black bread with an air of guarding a priceless booty: and Razumov
averting his glance envied her the peace of her mind and the serenity
of her fate. 
   To one reading Mr. Razumov's narrative it is really a wonder how
he managed to keep going as he did along one interminable street after
another on pavements that were gradually becoming blocked with snow.
It was the thought of Haldin locked up in his rooms and the desperate
.p41
desire to get rid of his presence which drove him forward. No rational
determination,had any part in his exertions. Thus when on arriving at
the low eating house he heard that the man of horses,Ziemianitch,was
not there he could only stare stupidly. 
   The waiter,a wild-haired youth in tarred boots and a pink shirt,
explained,uncovering a lot of pale gums in a silly grin,that Ziemianitch
had got his skinful early in the afternoon and had gone away with a
bottle under each arm to keep it up amongst the horses{ -- }he supposed. 
   The owner of the vile den ,a bony short man,in a dirty cloth caftan,
coming down to his heels,stood by, his hands tucked into his belt, and
nodded confirmation. 
   The reek of spirits,the greasy rancid steam of food got Razumov by
the throat. He struck a table with his clenched hand and shouted
violently : 
   {op"} You lie." 
   Bleary unwashed faces were turned in his direction. A mild-eyed
ragged tramp drinking tea at the next table moved further away. A
rumour of wonder arose with an undertone of uneasiness. A laugh was
heard too and an exclamation. {op"}There ! There !" jeeringly soothing.
The waiter looked all round and announced to the room : 
   {op"} The gentleman won't believe that Ziemianitch is drunk." 
   From a distant corner a hoarse voice belonging to a horrible
nondescript shaggy being with a black face like the muzzle of a bear grunted
angrily : 
   {op"}The cursed driver of thieves. What do we want with his gentlemen
here. We are all honest folk in this place."
.p42 
   Razumov biting his lip till blood came to keep himself from
bursting into imprecations followed the owner of the den, who, whispering
{op"}Come along little father," led him into a tiny hole of a place
behind the wooden counter, whence proceeded a sound of splashing. A wet 
and bedraggled creature, a sort of sexless and shivering scarecrow
washed glasses in there,bending over a wooden tub by the light of
a tallow dip. 
   {op"}Yes, little father", the man in the long caftan said plaintively.He
had a brown, cunning little face, a thin greyish beard. Trying to
light a tin lantern he hugged it to his breast and talked
garrulously the while. 
   He would show Ziemianitch to the gentleman to prove there were no
lies told. And he would show him drunk. Some woman it seems ran away
last night. {op"}Such a hag she was! Thin! Tfui." He spat. They were
always running away from that driver of the devil{ -- }and he sixty years old
too.{ -- }Could never get used to it. But each heart knows sorrow after
its own kind and Ziemianitch was a born fool all his days. And
then he trusted the bottle. {op"}Who could bear life in our land without
the bottle"{ -- }he says. A proper Russian man{ -- }the little pig . . . . . . .  Be
pleased to follow me." 
   Razumov crossed a quadrangle of deep snow enclosed between high
walls with innumerable windows. Here and there a dim yellow light
hung within the four-square mass of darkness. The house was an
enormous slum,a hive of human vermin,a monumental abode of misery
towering on the verge of starvation and despair. 
   In a corner the ground sloped sharply down and Razumov followed the
.p43
light of the lantern through a small doorway into a long cavernous
place like a neglected subterranean byre. Deep within ,three shaggy
little horses tied up to rings hung their heads together ,motionless
and shadowy in the dim light of the lantern. It must have been the
famous team of Haldin's escape. Razumov peered fearfully into the
gloom. His guide pawed in the straw with his foot.
{op"}Here he is. Ah ! the little pigeon. A true Russian man. {op"}No heavy
hearts for me{ -- }he says{ -- }bring out the bottle and take your ugly mug
out of my sight. Ha ! Ha ! Ha ! That's the fellow he is." 
   He held the lantern over a prone form of a man, apparently fully
dressed for outdoors. His head was lost in a pointed cloth hood. On
the other side of a heap of straw protruded a pair of feet in
monstrous thick boots. 
   {op"}Always ready to drive," commented the keeper of the eating house.
{op"}A proper Russian driver that . Saint or devil,night or day is all
one to Ziemianitch when his heart is free from sorrow. {op"}I don't ask
who you are but where you want to go," he says. He would drive Satan
himself to his own abode and come back whistling to his horses. Many
a one he has driven who is clanking his chains in the Nertchinsk
mines by this time." 
   Razumov shuddered. 
   {op"}Call out. Wake him up," he faltered out. 
   The other set down his light,stepped back and launched a kick at
the prostrate sleeper. The man shook at the impact but did not move. At
the third kick he grunted but remained inert as before.
   The eating-house keeper desisted and fetched a deep sigh.
.p44 
   {op"} You see for yourself how it is. We have done what we can for you."
   He picked up the lantern. The intense black spokes of shadow swung
about in the circle of light. A terrible fury{ -- }the blind rage of
self-preservation possessed Razumov. 
   {op"} Ah ! The vile beast," he bellowed out in an unearthly tone which
made the lantern jump and tremble : {op"} I shall wake you ! Give me. . . . .
. . Give me. . . . 
   He looked round wildly, seized the handle of a broken stable fork
and rushing forward struck at the prostrate body with inarticulate
cries. After a time his cries ceased and the rain of blows fell in the
stillness and shadows of the cellar-like stable. Razumov belaboured
Ziemianitch with an insatiable fury, in great volleys of sounding
thwacks.  Except for the violent movements
of Razumov nothing stirred, neither the beaten man nor the spoke-like
shadows of the walls. And only the sound of blows was heard. It was
a strange scene.
   Suddenly there was a sharp crack. The stick broke and half
of it flew far away into the gloom beyond the light. At the same time
Ziemianitch sat up. At this Razumov became as motionless as the man
with the lantern{ -- }only his breast heaved for air as if ready to burst.
   Some dull sensation of pain must have penetrated at last the
consoling night of drunkeness enwrapping the {op"}bright Russian soul"of
Haldin's enthusiastic praise. But Zienianitch evidently saw nothing. His
eyeballs blinked all white in the light once, twice{ -- }then the gleam
went out. For a moment he sat in the straw with closed eyes with a
.p45
strange air of weary meditation, then fell over slowly on his
side without making the slightest sound. Only the straw
rustled a little. Razumov stared wildly, fighting for his
breath. After a second or two he heard a light snore. 
   He flung from him the piece of stick remaining in his grasp,
and went off with great hasty strides without looking back once.
   After going heedlessly for some fifty yards along the
street he walked into a snowdrift and was up to his knees before
he stopped. 
   This recalled him to himself; and glancing about he
discovered he had been going in the wrong direction. He retraced
his steps but now at a more moderate pace. When passing
before the house he had just left he flourished his fist at the
sombre refuge of misery and crime rearing its sinister bulk on
the white ground. It had an air of brooding. He let his arm
fall by his side{ -- }discouraged. 
   Ziemianitch's passionate surrender to sorrow and
consolation had baffled him. That was the people. A true Russian
man! Razumov was glad he had beaten that brute{ -- }the {op"}bright
.p46
soul" of the other. Here they were: the people and the
enthusiast. 
   Between the two he was done for. Between the
drunkenness of the peasant incapable of action and the dream
intoxication of the idealist incapable of perceiving the reason of
things and the true character of men. It was a sort of terrible
childishness. But children had their masters. {op"}Ah! the
stick, the stick, the stern hand," thought Razumov, longing for
power to hurt and destroy. 
   He was glad he had thrashed that brute. The physical
exertion had left his body in a comfortable glow. His mental
agitation too was clarified as if all the feverishness had gone
out of him in a fit of outward violence. Together with the
persisting sense of terrible danger he was conscious now of a
tranquil unquenchable hate. 
   He walked slower and slower. And indeed, considering
the guest he had in his rooms, it was no wonder he lingered on
the way. It was like harbouring a pestilential disease that
would not perhaps take your life but would take from you all
.p47
that made life worth living{ -- }a subtle pest that would
convert earth into a hell. 
   What was he doing now? Lying on the bed as if dead,
with the back of his hands over his eyes? Razumov had a
morbidly vivid vision of Haldin on his bed{ -- }the white pillow
hollowed by the head, the legs in long boots, the upturned
feet. And in his abhorrence he said to himself: {op"}I'll kill
him when I get home." But he knew very well that that was of
no use. The corpse would hang round his neck nearly as
fatal as the living man. Nothing short of complete annihilation
would do. And that was impossible. What then? Must one
kill oneself to escape this visitation? 
   Razumov's despair was too profoundly tinged with hate to
accept that issue. 
   And yet it was despair{ -- }nothing less{ -- }at the thought of
having to live with Haldin for an indefinite number of days in
mortal alarm at every sound. But perhaps when he heard that
this {op"}bright soul" of Ziemianitch suffered from a drunken
eclipse the fellow would take his infernal resignation
.p48
somewhere else. And that was not likely on the face of it. 
   Razumov thought {op"}I am being crushed{ -- }and I can't even
run away." Other men had somewhere a corner of the earth{ -- }
some little house in the provinces where they had a right to
take their troubles to. A material refuge. He had nothing.
He had not even a moral refuge{ -- }the refuge of confidence.
Who could he go to with this tale{ -- }in all this great, great
land? 
   Razumov stamped his foot{ -- }and under the soft carpet of
snow felt the hard ground of Russia, inanimate, cold, inert,
like a sullen and tragic mother hiding her face under a winding
sheet{ -- }his native soil!{ -- }his very own{ -- }without a fireside,
without a heart! . . . 
   He cast his eyes upwards and stood amazed. The snow had
ceased to fall, and now as if by a miracle, he saw above his
head the clear black sky of the northern winter, decorated with
the sumptuous fires of the stars. It was a canopy fit for the
resplendent purity of the snows. 
   Razumov received an almost physical impression of endless
.p49
space and of countless millions. 
   He responded to it with the readiness of a Russian who
is born to an inheritance of space and numbers. Under the
sumptuous immensity of the sky, the snow covered the endless
forests, the frozen rivers, the plains of an immense country,
obliterating the landmarks, the accidents of the ground
levelling everything under its uniform whiteness, like a
monstrous blank page awaiting the record of an inconceivable
history. It covered the passive land with its lives of
countless people like Ziemianitch and its handful of agitators like
this Haldin{ -- }murdering foolishly. 
   It was a sort of sacred inertia. Razumov felt a respect
for it. A voice seemed to cry within him: {op"}Don't touch it."
It was a guarantee of duration, of safety, while the travail of
maturing destiny went on{ -- }a work not of revolutions with their
passionate levity of action and their shifting impulses{ -- }but of
peace. What it needed was not the conflicting aspirations of a
people, but a will strong and one: it wanted not the babble of
many voices, but a man{ -- }strong and one!
.p50
Razumov stood on the point of conversion. He was fascinated
by its approach, by its overpowering logic. For a train
of thought is never false. The falsehood lies deep in the
necessities of existence, in secret fears and half-formed
ambitions, in the secret confidence combined with a secret
mistrust of ourselves, in the love of hope and in the dread of
uncertain days. 
   In Russia, the land of spectral ideas and disembodied
aspirations, many brave minds have turned away at last from the
vain and endless conflict to the one great historical fact of
the land. They turned to autocracy for the peace of their
patriotic conscience as a weary unbeliever, touched by grace,
turns to the faith of his fathers for the blessing of
spiritual rest. Like other Russians before him, Razumov, in conflict
with himself felt the touch of grace upon his forehead. 
   {op"}Haldin means disruption", he thought to himself, beginning
to walk again. {op"}What is he with his indignation, with his
talk of bondage{ -- }with his talk of God's justice. All that
means disruption. Better that thousands should suffer than
.p51
that a people should become a disintegrated mass, helpless
like dust in the wind. Obscurantism is better than the
light of incendiary torches. The seed germinates in the
night. Out of the dark soil springs the perfect plant.
But a volcanic eruption is sterile, the ruin of the fertile
ground. And am I, who love my country{ -- }who have nothing
but that to love and put my faith in{ -- }am I to have my future,
perhaps my usefulness ruined by this sanguinary fanatic?" 
   The Grace entered into Razumov. He believed now in
the man who would come at the appointed time. 
   What is a throne? A few pieces of wood upholstered in
velvet. But a throne is a seat of power too. The form of
government is the shape of a tool{ -- }an instrument. But
twenty thousand bladders inflated by the noblest sentiments
and jostling against each other in the air are a miserable
incumbrance of space, holding no power, possessing no will,
having nothing to give. 
   He went on thus, heedless of the way, holding a discourse
with himself with extraordinary abundance and facility.  Generally
.p52
his phrases came to him slowly, after a conscious
and painstaking wooing. Some superior power had inspired him
with a flow of masterly argument as certain converted sinners
become overwhelmingly loquacious. 
   He felt an austere exultation. 
   {op"}What are the luridly smoky lucubrations of that fellow
to the clear grasp of my intellect," he thought. {op"}Is not
this my country. Have I not got forty million brothers?" he
asked himself unaswerably victorious in the silence of his
breast. And the fearful thrashing he had given the inanimate
Ziemianitch seemed to him like a sign of intimate union, a
pathetically severe necessity of brotherly love. {op"}No! If I
must suffer let me at least suffer for my convictions, not for
a crime my reason{ -- }my cool superior reason rejects." 
   He ceased to think for a moment. The silence in his
breast was complete. But he felt a suspicious uneasiness,
such as we may experience when we enter a pitch dark strange
place{ -- }the irrational feeling that something may jump upon us
in the dark{ -- }the absurd dread of the unseen.
.p53 
   Of course he was far from being a moss-grown reactionary.
Everything was not for the best. Despotic bureaucracy . . . . . 
abuses . . . .  corruption . . . .  and so on. Capable men were wanted.
Enlightened intelligences. Devoted hearts. But absolute
power should be preserved{ -- }the tool ready for the man{ -- }for the
great autocrat of the future. Razumov believed in him. The
logic of history made him unavoidable. The state of the people
demanded him. {op"}What else?" he asked himself ardently, {op"}could
move all that mass in one direction. Nothing could. Nothing
but a single will." 
   He was persuaded that he was sacrificing his personal
longings of liberalism{ -- }rejecting the attractive error for the
stern Russian truth. {op"}That's patriotism," he observed mentally,
and added, {op"}There's no stopping midway on that road," and then
remarked to himself, {op"}I am not a coward." 
   And again there was a dead silence in Ramuzov's breast.
He walked with lowered head, making room for no one. He walked
slowly and his thoughts returning spoke within him with solemn
slowness.
.p54 
   {op"}What is this Haldin? And what am I? Only two grains
of sand. But a great mountain is made up of just such
insignificant grains. And the death of a man or of many men is
an insignificant thing. Yet we combat a contagious pestilence.
Do I want his death? No! I would save him if I could{ -- }but
no one can do that{ -- }he is the withered member that must be cut
off. If I must perish through him, let me at least not perish
with him, and, associated against my will with his sombre folly
that understands nothing either of men or things. Why should
I leave a false memory!" 
   It passed through his mind that there was no one in the world
who cared what sort of memory he left behind him. He exclaimed
to himself instantly: {op"}Perish vainly for a falsehood!. .  what a
miserable fate!" 
   He was now in a more animated part of the town. He did
not remark the crash of two colliding sledges close to the
curb. The driver of one bellowed tearfully at his fellow. 
   {op"}Oh! Thou vile wretch!" 
   This coarse yell let out nearly in his ear disturbed
.p55
Razumov. He shook his head impatiently and went on looking
straight before him. Suddenly on the snow, stretched on his
back right across his path, he saw Haldin, solid, distinct, real,
with his inverted hands over his eyes, clad in a brown close fitting  
coat and long boots. He was lying out of the way a little, as
though he had selected that place on purpose. The snow round him
was untrodden. 
   This hallucination had such a solidity of aspect that the
first movement of Razumov was to reach for his pocket to
assure himself that the key of his rooms was there. But he
checked the impulse with a disdainful curve of his lips. He understood. His
thought concentrated intensely on the figure left lying on
his bed, had culminated in this extraordinary illusion of the
sight. Razumov tackled the phenomenon calmly. With a stern
face, without a check and gazing far beyond the vision, he
walked on, experiencing nothing but a slight tightening of
the chest. After passing he turned his head for a glance and
saw only the unbroken track of his foot-steps over the place where
the breast of the phantom of Haldin had been.
.p56
   Razumov walked on and after a little time whispered his
wonder to himself. 
   {op"}Exactly as if alive! Seemed to breathe! And right in
my way too! I have had an extraordinary experience." 
   He made a few steps and muttered through his set teeth: 
   {op"}I shall give him up." 
   Then for some twenty yards or more all was blank. He
wrapped his cloak closer round him. He pulled his cap well
forward over his eyes. 
   {op"}Betray. A great word. What is betrayal? They talk
of a man betraying his country, his friends, his sweetheart.
There must be a moral bond first. All a man can betray is his
conscience. And how is my conscience engaged here; by what
bond of common faith, of common conviction am I obliged to let that
fanatical evil-doer drag me down with him? On the contrary{ -- }
every obligation of true courage is the other way." 
   Razumov looked round from under his cap. 
   {op"}What can the prejudice of the world reproach me with?
.p57
Have I provoked his confidence? No! Have I by a single
word, look, or gesture given him reason to suppose that I
accepted his trust in me? No! It is true that I consented to
go and see his Ziemianitch. Well, I have been to see him.
And I broke a stick on his back too{ -- }the brute." 
   Something seemed to turn over in his head bringing upper-
most a singularly hard clear facet of his brain. 
   {op"}It would be better however," he said to himself with a
quite different mental accent, {op"}to keep that circumstance
altogether to myself." 
   He had passed beyond the turn leading to his lodgings, and had
reached a wide and fashionable street. Some shops were still
open and all the restaurants. Lights fell on the pavement where
men in expensive fur coats, with here and there the elegant
figure of a woman, walked with an air of leisure. Razumov
looked at them with the contempt of an austere believer for the
frivolous crowd. It was the world{ -- }those officers, dignitaries,
men of fashion, officials, members of the Yacht Club. The
event of the morning affected them all. What would they say
.p58
if they knew what this student in a cloak was going to do? 
   {op"}Not one of them is capable of feeling and thinking as
deeply as I can. How many of them could accomplish an act of
conscience?" 
   Razumov lingered in the well-lighted street. He was
firmly decided. Indeed it could hardly be called a decision.
He had simply discovered what he had meant to do all along.
And yet he felt the need of some other mind's sanction. 
   With something resembling anguish he said to himself: 
   {op"}I want to be understood." The universal aspiration with
all its profound and melancholy meaning assailed heavily
Razumov, who, amongst eighty millions of his kith and kin had no
heart to which he could open himself. 
   The attorney was not to be thought of. He despised the
little agent of chicane too much. One could not go and lay
one's conscience before the policeman at the corner. Neither
was Razumov anxious to go to the chief of his district's police{ -- }
a common-looking person whom he used to see sometimes in the
street in a shabby uniform and with a cigarette stuck to his
.p59
lower lip. {op"}He would begin by locking me up most probably.
At any rate he would get excited and create an awful
commotion," thought Razumov practically. 
   An act of conscience must be done with outward dignity.
   Razumov longed desperately for a word of advice, for
moral support. Who knows what true loneliness is{ -- }not the
conventional word but the naked terror? To the lonely
themselves it wears a mask. The most miserable outcast hugs some
memory or some illusion. Now and then a fatal conjunction of
events may lift the veil for an instant. For an instant only.
No human being could bear a steady view of moral solitude
without going mad. 
   Razumov had reached that point of vision. To escape from
it he embraced for a whole minute the delirious purpose of
rushing to his lodgings and flinging himself on his knees by
the side of the bed with the dark figure stretched on it; to
pour out a full confession in passionate words that would stir
the whole being of that man to its innermost depths; that
would end in embraces and tears; in an incredible fellowship
.p60
of souls{ -- }such as the world had never seen. It was sublime! 
   Inwardly he wept and trembled already. But to the casual
eyes that were cast upon him he was aware that he appeared as
a tranquil student in a cloak, out for a leisurely stroll. He
noted too the sidelong, brilliant glance of a pretty woman{ -- }with
a delicate head, and covered in the hairy skins of wild beasts
down to her feet, like a frail and beautiful savage{ -- }which
rested for a moment with a sort of mocking tenderness on the
deep abstraction of that good-looking young man. 
   Suddenly Razumov stood still. The glimpse of a passing
grey whisker caught and lost in the same instant, had evoked the
complete image of Prince K{---}the man who once had pressed his
hand as no other man had pressed it{ -- }a faint but lingering
pressure like a secret sign, like a half-unwilling caress. 
   And Razumov marvelled at himself.
   {op"}A senator, a dignitary, a great personage, the very man{ -- }
He!" 
   A strange softening emotion came over Razumov{ -- }made his
.p61
knees shake a little. He repressed it with a new-born
austerity. All that sentiment was pernicious nonsense. 
He couldn't be quick enough; and
when he got into a sledge he shouted to the driver: 
   {op"}To the K{---} Palace. Get on{ -- }you! Fly!" 
   The startled Moujik, bearded up to the very whites of his
eyes answered obsequiously: 
   {op"}I hear, your high Nobility."
   It was lucky for Razumov that Prince K{---} was not of a
timid character. On the day of Mr de P{---}'s murder an
extreme alarm and despondency prevailed in the high official
spheres. 
   Prince K{---} sitting sadly in his study was told by his
alarmed servants that a mysterious young man had forced his way
into the hall, refused to tell his name and the nature of his
business, and would not move from there till he had seen his
Excellency in private. Instead of locking himself up and
telephoning for the police as nine out of ten high personages
.p62
would have done that evening, the Prince gave way to curiosity
and came quietly to the door of his study. 
   In the hall, the front door standing wide open, he
recognised at once Razumov, pale as death, his eyes blazing,
and surrounded by perplexed lackeys. 
   The prince was vexed beyond measure, and even indignant.
But his humane instincts and a subtle sense of self-respect
could not allow him to let this young man be thrown out into
the street by base menials. He retreated unseen into his room
and after a little rang his bell. Razumov heard in the hall an
ominously raised harsh voice saying somewhere far away:{ -- }
   {op"}Show the gentleman in here." 
   Razumov walked in without a tremor. He felt himself
invulnerable{ -- }raised far above the shallowness of common judgment.
Though he saw the Prince looking at him with black displeasure
the lucidity of his mind of which he was very conscious gave
him an extraordinary assurance. He was not asked to sit down. 
   Half an hour later they appeared in the hall together. All
the lackeys stood up and the Prince moving with difficulty was
.p63
helped into his furs. The carriage had been ordered before.
When the great double door was flung open with a crash, Razumov,
who had been standing silent with a lost gaze but with every
faculty intensely on the alert, heard the Prince's voice: 
   {op"}Your arm, young man." 
   The mobile, superficial mind of the ex-guard's officer,
man of showy missions, experienced in nothing but the arts of
gallant intrigue and worldly success, had been equally
impressed by the more obvious difficulties of such a situation
and by Razumov's quiet dignity in stating them. 
   He had said: {op"}No. Upon the whole I can't condemn the
step you ventured to take by coming to me with your story. It
is not an affair for Police understrappers. The greater
importance is attached to . . . . .  Set your mind at rest. I shall see
you through this most extraordinary and difficult situation." 
   Then the Prince rose to ring the bell and Razumov making
a short bow said with deference: 
   {op"}I have trusted my instinct. A young man having no
claim upon anybody in the world has in an hour of trial
.p64
involving his deepest political convictions turned to an
illustrious Russian{ -- }that's all." 
   The Prince had exclaimed hastily: 
   {op"}You have done well." 
   In the carriage{ -- }it was a small brougham on sleigh
runners{ -- }Razumov broke the silence in a voice that trembled
slightly. 
   {op"}My gratitude surpasses the greatness of my presumption." 
   He gasped, feeling unexpectedly in the dark a momentary
pressure on his arm. 
   {op"}You have done well," repeated the Prince. 
   When the carriage stopped the Prince murmured to Razumov
who had never ventured a single question: 
   {op"}The house of General T{---}". 
.p64
   In the middle of the snow-covered roadway blazed a great
bonfire. Some Cossacks, the bridles of their
horses over the arm, were warming themselves around. Two sentries
sentries stood at the door, several gendarmes lounged under
the great carriage gateway and, on the first floor landing, two
.p65
orderlies rose and stood at attention. Razumov walked at the
Prince's elbow. 
   A surprising quantity of hot-house plants in pots cumbered
the floor of the ante-room. Servants came forward. A young
man in civilian clothes arrived hurriedly, was whispered to,
bowed low and exclaiming zealously: {op"}Certainly{ -- }this minute",
fled within somewhere. The Prince signed to Razumov. 
   They passed through a suite of reception rooms all barely
lit and one of them prepared for dancing. The wife of the
General had put off her party. An atmosphere of consternation
pervaded the place. But the General's own room with heavy
sombre hangings, two massive desks and deep armchairs, had all
the lights turned on. The footman shut the door behind them and
they waited. 
   There was a coal fire in an English grate; Razumov had never
before seen such a fire; and the silence of the room was like the silence of
the grave; perfect, measureless, for even the clock on the
mantelpiece made no sound. Filling a corner, on a black pedestal
stood a quarter-life-size smooth-limbed bronze of an
.p66
adolescent figure, running. The Prince observed in an
undertone: 
   {op"}Spontini's. {op'}Flight of Youth'. Exquisite." 
   {op"}Admirable," assented Razumov, faintly. 
   They said nothing more after this, the Prince silent with
his grand air, Razumov staring at the bronze. He was worried
by a sensation resembling the gnawing of hunger. 
   He did not turn when he heard an inner door fly open,
and a quick footstep, muffled on the carpet. 
   The Prince's voice immediately exclaimed, thick with
excitement: 
   {op"}We have got him{ -- }ce mise{a}rable. A worthy young man
came to me{ -- }No! It's incredible . . . " 
   Razumov held his breath before the bronze as if expecting
a crash. Behind his back a voice he had never heard before
insisted politely: 
   {op"}Mais asseyez vous donc." 
   The Prince almost shrieked: {op"}Mais comprenez vous, mon cher!
L'assassin!{ -- }the murderer{ -- }we have got him . .". 
.p67 
   Razumov spun round. The general's smooth big cheeks rested
on the stiff collar of his uniform. He must have been
already looking at Razumov, because that last saw the pale blue
eyes resting on him coldly. 
   The Prince from a chair waved an impressive hand. 
   {op"}This is the most honourable young man whom Providence
itself . . . Mr Razumov." 
   The General acknowledged the introduction by frowning
slightly at Razumov, who did not make the slightest movement. 
   Sitting down before his desk the General listened with
compressed lips. It was impossible to detect the slightest
emotion on his face. 
   Razumov watched the immobility of the fleshy
profile. But it lasted only a moment, till the Prince had
finished; and when the General turned full face to the providential young man his florid
complexion, the blue, unbelieving eyes and the bright white
flash of an automatic smile had an air of jovial, careless
cruelty. He expressed no wonder at the extraordinary story{ -- }
no pleasure or excitement{ -- }no incredulity either. He betrayed
.p68
no sentiment whatever. Only with a politeness almost
deferential suggested that {op"}the bird might have flown while Mr { -- }Mr
Razumov was running about the streets." 
   Razumov advanced to the middle of the room and said: 
   {op"}The door is locked and I have the key in my pocket." 
   His loathing for the man was intense. It had come upon
him so unawares that he felt he had not kept it out of his
voice. The General looked up at him thoughtfully, and Razumov
grinned. 
   All this went over the head of Prince K{---} seated in a deep
armchair, very tired and impatient. 
   {op"}A student called Haldin," said the General thoughtfully. 
   Razumov ceased to grin. 
   {op"}That is his name," he said unneccessarily loud. {op"}Viktor
Viktorovitch Haldin{ -- }a student." 
   The General shifted his position a little. 
   {op"}How is he dressed? Would you have the goodness to tell
me." 
   Razumov described angrily Haldin's clothing in a few jerky
.p69
words. The General stared all the time, then addressing the
Prince: 
   {op"}We were not without some indications," he said in French.
{op"}A good woman who was in the street described to us somebody
wearing a dress of the sort as the thrower of the second bomb.
We have detained her at the Secretariat and everyone in a Tcherkess coat we could
lay our hands on has been brought to her to look at. She kept
on signing herself and shaking her head at them. It was
exasperating . . . " 
   He turned to Razumov and in Russian, with friendly
reproach: 
   {op"}Take a chair, Mr Razumov{ -- }do. Why are you standing?"
   Razumov sat down carelessly and looked at the General. 
   {op"}This goggle-eyed imbecile understands nothing," he thought.   The Prince began to speak loftily. 
   {op"}Mr Razumov is a young man of conspicuous abilities. I
have it at heart that his future should not . . ." 
   {op"}Certainly," interrupted the General, with a movement of
the hand. {op"}Has he any weapons on him, do you think, Mr
.p70
Razumov?" 
   The General employed a gentle musical voice. Razumov
answered with suppressed irritation: 
   {op"}No. But my razors are lying about{ -- }you understand." 
   The General lowered his head approvingly. 
   {op"}Precisely." 
   Then to the Prince, explaining courteously: 
   {op"}We want that bird alive. It will be the devil if we
can't make him sing a little before we are done with him." 
   The grave-like silence of the room with its mute clock
fell upon the polite modulations of this terrible phrase.
The Prince hidden in the chair made no sound. 
   The General unexpectedly developed a thought. 
   {op"}Fidelity to menaced institutions on which depend the
safety of a throne and of a people is no child's play. We know
that, mon Prince and{ -- }tenez{ -- }" he went on with a sort of
flattering harshness, {op"}Mr Razumov here begins to understand
that too." 
   His eyes which he turned upon Razumov seemed to be
.p71
starting out of his head. This grotesqueness of aspect no
longer shocked Razumov. He said with gloomy conviction: 
   {op"}Haldin will never speak." 
   {op"}That remains to be seen," muttered the General. 
   {op"}I am certain," insisted Razumov. {op"}A man like this
never speaks . . .  Do you imagine that I am here from fear," he
added violently. He felt ready to stand by his opinion of Haldin
to the last extremity. 
   {op"}Certainly not," protested the General, with great
simplicity of tone. {op"}And I don't mind telling you, Mr Razumov,
that if he had not come with his tale to such a staunch and
loyal Russian as you, he would have disappeared like a stone
in the water . . .  which would have had a detestable effect," he
added, with a bright, cruel smile under his stony stare. {op"}So
you see, there can be no suspicion of any fear here." 
   The Prince intervened, looking at Razumov round the
back of the armchair. 
   {op"}Nobody doubts the moral soundness of your action. Be
at ease in that respect, pray."
.p72
   He turned to the General uneasily. 
   {op"}That's why I am here. You may be surprised why I
should . . . " 
   The General hastened to interrupt. 
   {op"}Not at all. Extremely natural. You saw the
importance. . . . " 
   {op"}Yes," broke in the Prince. {op"}And I venture to ask
insistently that mine and Mr Razumov's intervention should not
become public. He is a young man of promise{ -- }of remarkable
aptitudes." 
   {op"}I haven't a doubt of it," murmured the General. {op"}He
inspires confidence." 
   {op"}All sorts of pernicious views are so widespread nowadays{ -- }
they taint such unexpected quarters{ -- }that, monstrous as it
seems, he might suffer . . .  His studies . . .  His . . . " 
   The General with his elbows on the desk took his head
between his hands. 
   {op"}Yes, Yes. I am thinking it out. . . .  How long is it
since you left him at your rooms, Mr Razumov?"
.p73 
   Razumov mentioned the hour which nearly corresponded with
the time of his distracted flight from the big slum house.
He had made up his mind to keep Ziemianitch out of the affair
completely. To mention him at all would mean imprisonment for the
{op'}bright soul', perhaps cruel floggings, and in the end a journey into Siberia
in chains. Razumov, who had beaten Ziemianitch, felt for him
now a vague, remorseful tenderness. 
   The General giving way for the first time to his secret
sentiments, exclaimed contemptuously: 
   {op"}And you say he came in to make you this confidence like
this{ -- }for nothing{ -- }a{gr} propos des bottes." 
   Razumov felt danger in the air. The merciless suspicion
of despotism had spoken openly at last. Sudden fear
sealed Razumov's lips. The silence of the room resembled now
the silence of a deep dungeon, where time does not count and a
suspect person is sometimes forgotten. But the Prince came to
the rescue. 
   {op"}Providence itself has led the wretch in a moment of mental
aberration to seek Mr Razumov on the strength of some old, utterly
.p74
misinterpreted exchange of ideas{ -- }some sort of idle speculative
conversation{ -- }months ago{ -- }I am told{ -- }and completely
forgotten till now by Mr Razumov." 
   {op"}Mr Razumov," queried the General coldly, after a short
silence, {op"}do you often indulge in speculative conversation?" 
   {op"}No, Excellency," answered Razumov, coolly, in a sudden
access of self-confidence. {op"}I am a man of deep convictions.
Crude opinions are in the air. They are not always worth
combating. But even the silent contempt of a serious mind may be
misinterpreted by headlong utopists." 
   The General stared from between his hands. Prince K{---}
murmured: 
   {op"}A serious young man. Un esprit supe{a}rieur." 
   {op"}I see that, mon cher Prince," said the General. {op"}Mr
Razumov is quite safe with me. I am interested in him. He has
it seems the great and useful quality of inspiring confidence.
What I was wondering at is why the other should mention anything
at all{ -- }I mean even the bare fact alone{ -- }if his object was only to
obtain temporary shelter for a few hours. For, after all,
.p75
nothing was easier than to say nothing about it unless indeed
he were trying, under a crazy misapprehension of your true
sentiments, to enlist your assistance{ -- }eh, Mr Razumov?" 
   It seemed to Razumov that the floor was moving slightly.
This grotesque man in a tight uniform was terrible. It was
right that he should be terrible. 
   {op"}I can see what your Excellency has in your mind. But I
can only answer that I don't know why." 
   {op"}I have nothing in my mind," murmured the General, with
gentle surprise. 
   {op"}I am his prey{ -- }his helpless prey," thought Razumov. The
fatigues and the disgusts of that afternoon, the need to
forget, the fear which he could not keep off, re-awakened his
hate for Haldin. 
   {op"}Then I can't help your Excellency. I don't know what he
meant. I only know there was a moment when I wished to kill
him. There was also a moment when I wished myself dead. I
said nothing. I was overcome. I provoked no confidence{ -- }I
asked for no explanations{ -- }"
.p76 
   Razumov seemed beside himself; but his mind was lucid. It
was really a calculated outburst. 
   {op"}It is rather a pity," the General said, {op"}that you did not.
Don't you know at all what he means to do?" 
   Razumov calmed down and saw an opening there. 
   {op"}He told me he was in hopes that a sledge would meet him
about half an hour after midnight at the seventh lamp-post on
the left from the upper end of Karabelnaya. At any rate he
meant to be there at that time. He did not even ask me for a change of
clothes." 
   {op"}Ah voila{gr}!" said the General, turning to Prince K{---} with
an air of satisfaction. {op"}There is a way to keep your prote{a}ge{a},
Mr Razumov, quite clear of any connection with the actual arrest.
We shall be ready for that gentleman in Karabelnaya." 
   The Prince expressed his gratitude. There was real
emotion in his voice. Razumov motionless, silent, sat staring
at the carpet. The General turned to him. 
   {op"}Half an hour after midnight. Till then we have to depend
.p77
on you, Mr Razumov. You don't think he is likely to change his
purpose?" 
   {op"}How can I tell," said Razumov. {op"}Those men are not of
the sort that ever changes its purpose." 
   {op"}What men do you mean?" 
   {op"}Fanatical lovers of liberty in general. Liberty with a
capital L. Excellency. Liberty that means nothing precise.
Liberty in whose name crimes are committed." 
   The General murmured. 
   {op"}I detest rebels of every kind. I can't help it. It's
my nature!"
   He clenched a fist and shook it, drawing back his arm.
{op"}They shall be destroyed then." 
   {op"}They have made a sacrifice of their lives beforehand,"
said Razumov with malicious pleasure and looking the General
straight in the face. {op"}If Haldin does change his purpose
to-night you may depend on it that it shall not be to save his
life by flight in some other way. He would have thought then
of something else to attempt. But that is not likely."
.p78 
   The General repeated as if to himself: {op"}They shall be
destroyed." 
   Razumov assumed an impenetrable expression. The Prince
exclaimed: 
   {op"}What a terrible necessity!" The General's arm was
lowered slowly. 
   {op"}One comfort there is. That brood leaves no posterity.
I've always said it; one effort, pitiless, persistent, steady{ -- }
and we are done with them for ever." 
   Razumov thought to himself that this man entrusted with so
much arbitrary power must have believed what he said or else he
could not have gone on bearing the responsibility. 
   The General repeated again with extreme animosity: 
   {op"}I detest rebels. These subversive minds! These
intellectual debauches! My existence has been built on fidelity.
It's a feeling. To defend it I am ready to lay down my life{ -- }
and even my honour{ -- }if that were needed. But pray tell me
what honour can there be as against rebels{ -- }against people that
deny God Himself{ -- }perfect unbelievers. Brutes. It is horrible
.p79
to think of." 
   During this tirade Razumov, facing the General, had nodded
slightly twice. Prince K{---}standing on one side with his grand
air, murmured, casting up his eyes: 
   {op"}He{a}las!" 
   Then lowering his glance and with great decision declared: 
   {op"}This young man, General, is perfectly fit to apprehend the
bearing of your memorable words." 
   The General's whole expression changed from dull resentment
to perfect urbanity. 
   {op"}I would ask now, Mr Razumov" he said, {op"}to return to his
home. Note that I don't ask Mr Razumov whether he has
justified his absence to his guest. No doubt he did this
sufficiently. But I don't ask. Mr Razumov inspires confidence. It
is a great gift. I only suggest that a more prolonged absence
might awaken the criminal's suspicions and induce him perhaps to
change his plans." 
   He rose and with scrupulous courtesy escorted his visitors to the anteroom encumbered with flowerpots.
   Razumov parted with the Prince at the corner of a street. In the
carriage he had listened to speeches where natural sentiment struggled
.p80
with caution. Evidently the Prince was afraid of encouraging
any hopes of future intercourse. But there was a touch of
tenderness in the voice uttering in the dark the guarded general
phrases of good-will. And the Prince too said: 
   {op"}I have a perfect confidence in you, Mr Razumov." 
   {op"}They all, it seems, have confidence in me," thought
Razumov dully. He had an indulgent contempt for the man
sitting shoulder to shoulder with him in the confined space.
Probably he was afraid of scenes with his wife. She
was said to be proud and violent. 
   It seemed to him bizarre that secrecy should play such a
large part in the comfort and safety of lives. But he wanted
to put the Prince's mind at ease; and with a proper amount of
emphasis he said that being conscious of some small abilities
and confident in his power of work he trusted his future to his
own exertions. He protested his gratitude for the helping hand.
Such dangerous situations did not occur twice in the course of
one life{ -- }he added. 
   {op"}And you have met it with a firmness of mind and correctness
.p81
of feeling which give me a high idea of your worth," the Prince
said solemnly. {op"}You have now only to persevere{ -- }to
persevere." 
   On getting out on the pavement Razumov saw an ungloved
hand extended to him through the lowered window of the brougham.
It detained his own in its grasp for a moment, while the light
of a street lamp fell upon the Prince's long face and old-
fashioned grey whiskers. 
   {op"}I hope you are perfectly re-assured now as to the
consequences.". . . 
   {op"}After what your Excellency has condescended to do for
me. I can only rely on my conscience." 
   {op"}Adieu," said the whiskered head with feeling. 
   Razumov bowed. The brougham glided away with a slight
swish in the snow{ -- }he was alone on the edge of the pavement. 
   He said to himself that there was nothing to think about
and began walking towards his home. 
   He walked quietly. It was a common experience to
walk thus home to bed after an evening spent somewhere with his
.p82
fellows or in the cheaper seats of a theatre. After he had
gone a little way the familiarity of things got hold of him.
Nothing was changed. There was the familiar corner: and
when he turned it he saw the familiar dim light of the
provision shop kept by a German woman. There were loaves of
stale bread, bunches of onions and strings of sausages behind
the small window-panes. They were closing it. The sickly
lame fellow whom he knew so well by sight staggered out into the
snow embracing a large shutter. 
   Nothing would change. There was the familiar gateway
yawning black with feeble glimmers marking the arches of the
different staircases. 
   The sense of life's continuity depended on trifling
bodily impressions. The trivialities of daily existence were
an armour for the soul. And this thought re-inforced the
inward quietness of Razumov as he began to climb the stairs
familiar to his feet in the dark, with his hand on the
familiar clammy bannister. The exceptional could not prevail
against the material contacts which make one day resemble
.p83
another. To-morrow would be like yesterday. 
   It was only on the stage that the unusual was outwardly
acknowledged. 
   {op"}I suppose" thought Razumov{ -- }{op"}that if I had made up my
mind to blow out my brains on the landing I would be going up
these stairs as quietly as I am doing it now. What's a man
to do? What must be must be. Extraordinary things do happen.
But when they have happened they are done with. Thus too
when the mind is made up. That question is done with. And
the daily concerns, the familiarities of our thought swallow
it up{ -- }and the life goes on as before with its mysterious and
secret sides quite out of sight, as they should be. Life is
a public thing." 
   Razumov unlocked his door and took the key out;
entered very quietly and bolted the door behind him carefully. 
   He thought: {op"}He hears me," and after bolting the door
he stood still holding his breath. There was not a sound.
He crossed the bare outer room, stepping deliberately in the
darkness. Entering the other he felt all over his table for the
.p84
match-box. The silence, but for the groping of his hand, was
profound. Could the fellow be sleeping so soundly? 
   He struck a light and looked at the bed. Haldin was
lying on his back as before, only both his hands were under his
head. His eyes were open. He stared at the ceiling. 
   Razumov held the match up. He saw the clear-cut features,
the firm chin, the white forehead and the top-knot of fair hair
against the white pillow. There he was, lying flat on his
back. Razumov thought suddenly: {op"}I have walked over his chest." 
   He continued to stare till the match burnt itself out: then
struck another and lit the lamp in silence without looking
towards the bed any more. He had turned his back on it and was
hanging his coat on a peg when he heard Haldin sigh profoundly,
then ask in a tired voice: 
   {op"}Well! And what have you arranged?" 
   The emotion was so great that Razumov was glad to put his
hands against the wall. A diabolic impulse to say {op"}I have
given you up to the police," frightened him exceedingly. But
.p85
he did not say that. He said without turning round in muffled
voice: 
   {op"}It's done." 
   Again he heard Haldin sigh. He walked to the table, sat
down with the lamp before him and only then looked towards the
bed. 
   In the distant corner of the large room far away from the
lamp which was small and provided with a very thick china shade,
Haldin appeared like a dark and elongated shape{ -- }rigid with the
immobility of death. This body seemed to have less substance
than its own phantom walked over by Razumov in the street white
with snow. It was more alarming in its shadowy, persistent
reality, than the distinct but vanishing illusion. 
   Haldin was heard again. 
   {op"}You must have had a walk{ -- }such a walk . . . " he murmured
deprecatingly. {op"}This weather . . . " 
   Razumov answered with energy: 
   {op"}Horrible walk. . . .  A nightmare of a walk." 
   He shuddered audibly. Haldin sighed once more, then:
.p86 
   {op"}And so you have seen Ziemianitch{ -- }brother?" 
   {op"}I've seen him." 
   Razumov remembering the time he had spent with the Prince
thought it prudent to add: {op"}I had to wait some time." 
   {op"}A character{ -- }eh? It's extraordinary what a sense of the
necessity of freedom there is in that man. And he has sayings
too{ -- }simple, to the point, such as only the people can invent in
their rough sagacity. A character that . . . " 
   {op"}I, you understand, haven't had much opportunity . . . . "
Razumov muttered through his teeth. 
   Haldin continued to stare at the ceiling. 
   {op"}You see, brother. I have been a good deal in that house
of late. I used to take there books{ -- }leaflets. Not a few
of the poor people who live there can read. And, you see, the
guests for the feast of freedom must be sought for in byways
and hedges. The truth is I have almost lived in that house of
late. I slept sometimes in the stable. There is a stable . . . " 
   {op"}That's where I had my interview with Ziemianitch"
interrupted Razumov gently. A mocking spirit seemed to have entered
.p87
into him and he added: {op"}It was satisfactory in a sense. I
came away from it much relieved." 
   {op"}Ah! he's a fellow" went on Haldin, talking slowly at the
ceiling. {op"}I came to know him in that way, you see. For some
weeks now, ever since I resigned myself to do what had to
be done I tried to isolate myself. I gave up my rooms. What
was the good of exposing a decent widow woman to the risk of
being worried out of her mind by the police? I gave up seeing
any of our comrades. . . . " 
   Razumov drew to himself a half-sheet of paper and began to
trace lines on it with a pencil. 
   {op"}Upon my word," he thought angrily, {op"}he seems to have
thought of everybody's safety but mine." 
   Haldin was talking on. 
   {op"}This morning{ -- }Ah! this morning{ -- }that was different.
How can I explain to you? Before the deed was done I wandered at
night or lay hid in the day, thinking it out, and I felt restful.
Sleepless but restful. What was there for me to torment myself
.p88
about? But this morning{ -- }after! Then it was that I became
restless. I could not have stopped in that big house full of
misery. The miserable of this world can't give you peace.
Then when that silly caretaker began to shout, I said to
myself: {op'}There is a young man in this town head and shoulders
above common prejudices." 
   {op"}Is he laughing at me?" Razumov asked himself, going on
with his aimless drawing of triangles and squares. And
suddenly he thought: {op'}My behaviour must appear to him strange.
Should he take fright at my manner and rush off somewhere I shall
be undone completely. That infernal General. . . . " 
   He dropped the pencil and turned abruptly towards the bed
with the shadowy figure extended full length on it{ -- }so much more
indistinct than the one over whose breast he had walked without
faltering. Was this too a phantom? 
   The silence had lasted a long time. {op"}He is no longer
here" was the thought against which Razumov struggled desperately,
quite frightened at its absurdity. He is already gone and this . . . 
only. . . . "
.p89 
   He could resist no longer. He sprang to his feet, saying
aloud: {op"}I am intolerably anxious" and in a few headlong strides
stood by the side of the bed. His hand fell lightly on
Haldin's shoulder and directly he felt its reality he was beset
by an insane temptation to grip that exposed throat and squeeze
the breath out ou that body, lest it should escape his custody
leaving only a phantom behind. 
   Haldin did not stir a limb, but his overshadowed eyes
moving a little gazed upwards at Razumov with wistful gratitude
for this manifestation of feeling. 
   Razumov turned abruptly away and strode up and down the
room. {op"}It would have been possibly a kindness" he muttered to
himself, and was appalled by the nature of that
apology for a murderous intention his mind had found somewhere
within him. And all the same he could not give it up. He
became lucid about it. {op"}What can he expect" he thought. {op"}The
halter{ -- }in the end. And I. . . . " 
   This argument was interrupted by Haldin's voice.
.p90 
   {op"}Why be anxious for me? They can kill my body but they
cannot exile my soul from this world. I tell you what{ -- }I
believe in this world so much that I cannot conceive eternity
otherwise than as a very long life. That is perhaps the reason
I am so ready to die." 
   {op"}H'm" muttered Razumov, and biting his lower lip he
continued to walk up and down and to carry on his strange argument. 
   Yes, to a man in such a situation{ -- }of course it would be
an act of kindness. The question however is not how to be kind
but how to be firm. He is a slippery customer . . . 
   {op"}I too, Viktor Viktorovitch, believe in this world of ours,"
he said with force. {op"}I too. while I live. . . .  But you seem
determined to haunt it. You can't seriously mean. . . . " 
   The voice of the motionless Haldin began: 
   {op"}Haunt it! Truly, the oppressors of thought which
quickens the world, the destroyers of souls which aspire to
perfection of human dignity, they shall be haunted. As to the
destroyers of my mere body I have forgiven them beforehand."
.p91 
   Razumov had stopped apparently to listen, but at the same
time he was observing his own sensations. He was vexed with
himself for attaching so much importance to what Haldin said. 
   {op"}The fellow's mad" he thought firmly, but this opinion did
not mollify him towards Haldin. It was a particularly impudent
form of lunacy{ -- }and when it got loose into the sphere of public
life of a country, it was obviously the duty of every good
citizen . . . " 
   This train of thought broke off short there and was
succeeded by a paroxysm of silent hatred towards Haldin, so intense
that Razumov hastened to speak at random. 
   {op"}Yes. Eternity, of course. I too can't very well
represent it to myself. . . .  I imagine it however as something quiet
and dull. There would be nothing unexpected{ -- }don't you see?
The element of time would be wanting." 
   He pulled out his watch and gazed at it. Haldin turned
over on his side and looked on intently. 
   Razumov got frightened at this movement. A slippery
.p92
customer this fellow with a phantom. It was not midnight yet.
He hastened on. 
   {op"}And unfathomable mysteries! Can you conceive secret places in
Eternity? Impossible. Whereas life is full of them. There
are secrets of birth for instance. One carries them on to the
grave. There is something comical. . . .  but never mind. And
there are secret motives of conduct. A man's most open actions
have a secret side to them. That is interesting and so
unfathomable! For instance, a man goes out of a room for a walk.
Nothing more trivial in appearance. And yet it may be
momentous. He comes back{ -- }he has seen perhaps a drunken brute,
taken particular notice of the snow on the ground{ -- }and behold
he is no longer the same man. The most unlikely things have a
secret power over one's thoughts{ -- }the grey whiskers of a
particular person{ -- }the goggle eyes of another." 
   Razumov's forehead was moist. He took a turn or two in the
room, his head low and smiling to himself viciously.
.p93 
   {op"}Have you ever reflected on the power of goggle eyes and
grey whiskers? Excuse me. You seem to think I must be crazy
to talk in this vein at such a time. But I am not talking
lightly. I have seen instances. It has happened to me once
to be talking to a man whose fate was affected by physical facts
of that kind. And the man did not know it. Of course it was
a case of conscience but the material facts such as these brought
about the solution . . .  And you tell me, Viktor Viktorovitch, not
to be anxious! Why! I am responsible for you" Razumov
almost shrieked. 
   He avoided with difficulty a burst of Mefistophelian
laughter. Haldin, very pale, raised himself on his elbow. 
   {op"}And the surprises of life" went on Razumov after glancing
at the other uneasily. {op"}Just consider their astonishing nature.
A mysterious impulse induces you to come here. I don't say you
have done wrong. Indeed, from a certain point of view you
could not have done better. You might have gone to a man with
affections and family ties. You have such ties yourself.
As to me you know I have been brought up in an educational
.p94
institute where they did not give us quite enough to eat. To
talk of affection in such a connection{ -- }you perceive yourself . . . 
As to ties the only ties I have in the world are social. I
must get acknowledged in some way before I can act on it. I
sit here working. . . .  And don't you think I am working for
progress too. I've got to find my own ideas of the true way . . . 
Pardon me" continued Razumov, after drawing breath and with a
short throaty laugh, {op"}but I haven't inherited a revolutionary
inspiration together with a resemblance from an uncle." 
   He looked again at his watch and noticed with sickening
disgust that there were yet a good many minutes to midnight.
He tore watch and chain off his waistcoat and laid them on the
table well in the circle of bright lamplight. Haldin reclining
on his elbow did not stir. Razumov was made uneasy by this
attitude. {op"}What move is he meditating
over so quietly?" he thought. {op"}He must be prevented. I must
keep on talking to him." 
   He raised his voice. 
   {op"}You are a son, a brother, a nephew, a cousin{ -- }I don't
.p95
know what{ -- }to no end of people. I am just a man. Here I
stand before you. A man with a mind. Did it ever occur to
you how a man who had never heard a word of warm affection or
praise in his life would think on matters on which you would
think first with or against your class, your domestic tradition{ -- }
your fireside prejudices . . .  Did you ever consider how a man like
that would feel? I have no domestic tradition. I have
nothing to think against. My tradition is historical. What
have I to look back to but that national past from which you
gentlemen want to wrench away your future. Am I to let my
intelligence, my aspirations towards a better lot be robbed of the
only thing it has to go upon at the will of violent enthusiasts?
You come from your province but all this land is mine{ -- }or I have
nothing. No doubt you shall be looked upon as a martyr some
day{ -- }a sort of hero{ -- }a political saint. But I
beg to be excused. I
am content in fitting myself to be a worker. And what can you
people do by scattering a few drops of blood on the snow! On
this Immensity. On this unhappy Immensity. I tell you" he
.p96
cried in a vibrating, subdued voice and advancing one step
nearer the bed, {op"}that what it needs is not a lot of haunting
phantoms that I could walk through{ -- }but a man!" 
   Haldin threw his arms forward as if to keep him off in
horror. 
   {op"}I understand it all now" he exclaimed with a sort of awe-
struck dismay. {op"}I understand{ -- }at last." 
   Razumov staggered back against the table. His forehead
broke out in perspiration while a cold shudder ran down his
spine. 
   {op"}What have I been saying?" he asked himself. {op"}Have I let
him slip through my fingers after all?" 
   He felt his lips go stiff like buckram and instead of a
reassuring smile he only achieved an uncertain grimace. 
   {op"}What will you have," he began in a conciliating voice which
got steady after the first trembling word or two. {op"}What will
you have. Consider{ -- }a man of studious retired habits{ -- }and
suddenly like this. . . .  I am not practised in talking delicately."
But . . . "
.p97 
   He felt anger, a wicked anger get hold of him again. 
   {op"}What were we to do together till midnight. Sit here
opposite each other and think of your{ -- }your{ -- }shambles." 
   Haldin had a subdued heartbroken attitude. He bowed his
head; his hands hung between his knees. His voice was low
and pained but calm. 
   {op"}I see now how it is, Razumov{ -- }brother. You are a
magnanimous soul but my action is abhorrent to you{ -- }alas . . . " 
   Razumov stared. From fright he had set his teeth so hard
that his whole face ached. It was impossible for him to make
a sound. 
   {op"}And even my person too is loathsome to you perhaps,"
Haldin added mournfully, after a short pause, looking up for a
moment then fixing his gaze on the floor. {op"}For indeed unless
one . . . " 
   He broke off, evidently waiting for a word. Razumov
remained silent. Haldin nodded his head dejectedly twice at
the floor. 
   {op"}Of course. Of course" he murmured . . . {op"}Ah! weary work!"
.p98 
   He remained perfectly still for a moment, then made
Razumov's leaden heart strike a ponderous blow, by springing
up briskly. 
   {op"}So be it" he cried sadly in a low distinct tone.
{op"}Farewell then". 
   Razumov started forward but the sight of Haldin's raised
hand checked him before he could get away from the table. He
leaned on it heavily listening to the faint sounds of some town
clock tolling the hour. Haldin already at the door, tall and
straight as an arrow, with his pale face and a hand raised
attentively, might have posed for the statue of a daring youth
listening to an inner voice. Razumov mechanically glanced
down at his watch. When he looked towards the door again
Haldin had vanished. There was a faint rustling in the outer
room, the feeble click of a bolt drawn back lightly. He was
gone{ -- }almost as noiseless as a vision. 
   Razumov ran forward unsteadily, with parted, voiceless
lips. The outer door stood open. Staggering on the landing
.p99
he leaned far over the bannister. Gazing down into the deep
black shaft with a tiny glimmering flame at the bottom he traced
by ear the rapid spiral descent of somebody running down the
stairs on tiptoe. It was a light swift pattering sound, that
sank away from him into the depths: a fleeting shadow passed
over the glimmer{ -- }a wink of the tiny flame. Then
stillness. 
   Razumov hung over, breathing the cold raw air tainted by
the evil smells of the unclean staircase. All quiet. 
   He went back into his room slowly shutting the doors after
him. The peaceful steady light of his little reading lamp
shone on the watch. Razumov stood looking down at the
little white dial. It wanted vet three minutes to midnight.
He took the watch into his hand, fumblingly. 
   {op"}Slow" he muttered: and a strange fit of nervelessness
came over him. His knees shook, the watch and chain slipped
through his fingers in an instant and fell on the floor. He
was so startled that he nearly fell himself. When at last he
regained enough confidence in his limbs to stoop for it he held
.p100
it to his ear at once. After a while he growled: 
   {op"}Stopped," and paused for quite a long time before he
muttered sourly: 
   {op"}It's done. . . . And now to work." 
   He sat down, reached haphazard for a book, opened it in
the middle and began to read; but after going consciously over
two lines he lost his hold on the print completely and did not
try to regain it. He thought: 
   {op"}There was to a certainty a police agent of some sort
watching the house across the street." 
   He imagined him lurking in a dark gateway, goggle-eyed,
muffled up in a cloak to the nose and with a General's plumed,
cocked hat on his head. This absurdity made him start in the
chair convulsively. He literally had to shake his head
violently to get rid of it. The man would be disguised
perhaps as a peasant . . . a beggar. . . .  Perhaps he would be just
buttoned up in a dark overcoat and carrying a loaded stick{ -- }
a shifty-eyed rascal, smelling of raw onions and spirits. 
   This evocation brought on positive nausea. {op"}What do I
.p101
want to bother about this," thought Razumov with disgust. {op"}Am
I a gendarme? Moreover it is done." 
   He got up in great agitation. It was not done. Not yet.
Not till half past twelve. And the watch had stopped. This
reduced him to despair. Impossible to know the time! The
landlady and all the people across the landing were asleep.
How could he go and. . . .  God knows what they
would imagine, or how much they would guess. He dared not go
into the streets to find out. {op"}I am a suspect now. There's
no use shirking that fact." he said to himself bitterly. If
Haldin from some cause or another gave them the slip and failed
to turn up in the Karabelnaya the police would be invading his
lodging. And if he were not in he could never clear himself.
Never. Razumov looked wildly about as if for some means of
seizing upon time which seemed to have escaped him altogether.
He had never, as far as he could remember, heard the striking of
that town clock in his rooms before this night. And he was not
even sure now whether he had heard it really on this night.
.p102 
   He went to the window and stood there with slightly bent
head on the watch for the faint sound. {op"}I will stay here till
I hear something" he said to himself. He stood still, his ear
turned to the panes. An atrocious aching numbness with
shooting pains in his back and legs tortured him. He did not
budge. His mind hovered on the borders of delirium. He
heard himself suddenly saying {op"}I confess" as a person might do
on the rack. {op"}I am on the rack" he thought. He felt ready to
swoon. The faint deep boom of the distant clock seemed to
explode in his head{ -- }he heard it so clearly. . . . One! 
   If Haldin had not turned up the police would have been
already here ransacking the house. No sound reached him.
This time it was done. 
   He dragged himself painfully to the table and dropped into
the chair. He flung the book away and took a square sheet
of paper. It was like the pile of sheets covered with his neat
minute handwriting, only blank. He took a pen brusquely and
dipped it with a vague notion of going on with the writing of
his essay{ -- }but his pen remained poised over the sheet. It
.p103
hung there for some time before it came down and formed long
scrawly letters. 
   Still-faced and his lips set hard Razumov began to write.
When he wrote big his neat handwriting lost its character
altogether{ -- }became unsteady, almost childish. He wrote five lines one
under the other.{ex}
	History not Theory.
	Patriotism not Internationalism.
	Evolution not Revolution.
	Direction not destruction
	Unity not Disruption.{ex}
   He gazed at them dully. Then his eyes strayed to the bed
and remained fixed there for a good many minutes while his
right hand groped all over the table, for the penknife.
   He rose at last and walking up with measured steps stabbed
the paper with the penknife to the lath and plaster wall at the
head of the bed. This done he stepped back a pace and
flourished his hand with a glance round the room.
   After that he never looked again at the bed. He took his
.p104
big cloak down from its peg and wrapping himself up closely
went to lie down on the hard horsehair sofa at the other side of
his room. A leaden sleep closed his eyelids at once. Several
times that night he woke up shivering from a dream of walking through
the heavy snow in a Russia where he was as completely alone as
any betrayed autocrat could be; an immense wintry Russia
which somehow his view could embrace in all its enormous expanse
as if it were a map. But after each shuddering start his
heavy eyelids fell over his glazed eyes and he slept again.
.p105
{cn}III
   Approaching this part of Mr Razumov's story, my mind, the
decent mind of an old teacher of languages feels more and more
the difficulty of the task. 
   The task is not in truth the writing in the narrative
form a precis of a strange human document, but the rendering{ -- }
I perceive it now clearly{ -- }of the moral conditions ruling over
a large portion of this earth's surface; conditions not easily
to be understood, much less discovered in the limits of a story
till some key word is found; a word that could stand at the
back of all the words covering the pages that remain to write;
a word which if not truth itself
may perchance hold truth enough to help the moral discovery which
should be the object of every tale. 
   I turn over for the hundreth time the leaves of Mr
Razumov's record, I lay it aside, I take up the pen{ -- }and the pen
being ready for its office of setting down black on white I
.p106
hesitate. For the word that persists in creeping under its
point is no other word than Cynicism. 
   For that is the mark of Russian Autocracy and of Russian
revolt. In its pride of numbers, in its strange pretensions
of sanctity and in the secret readiness to abase itself in
suffering the spirit of Russia is the spirit of cynicism. It
informs the declarations of her Statesmen, the theories of her
revolutionists and the mystic vaticinations of prophets to the
point of making freedom look like a form of debauch, and the
Christian virtues themselves appear positively indecent . . . But
I must apologise for the digression. It proceeds from the
consideration of the course taken by the story of Mr Razumov
after his conservative convictions diluted in a vague liberalism
natural to the ardour of his age had become crystallized by the
shock of his contact with Haldin. 
   Razumov woke up for the tenth time perhaps with a heavy
shiver. Seeing the light of day in his window he resisted
the inclination to lay himself down again. He did not 
remember anything but he did not think it strange to find himself
.p107
on the sofa in his cloak and chilled to the bone. But the
light coming through the window seemed strangely cheerless,
containing no promise as the light of each new day should for a
young man. It was the awakening of a man mortally ill, or
of a man ninety years old. He looked at the lamp which had
burnt itself out. It stood there, the extinguished beacon of
his labours, a cold object of brass and porcelain, amongst the
scattered pages of his notes and small piles of books{ -- }a mere
litter of blackened paper{ -- }dead matter{ -- }without significance
or interest. 
   He got on his feet and divesting himself of his cloak, hung
it on the peg. going through all the motions mechanically. An
incredible dullness, a ditch-water stagnation was sensible to
his perceptions as though life had withdrawn itself from all
things and even from his own thoughts. There was not a sound
in the house. 
   Turning away from the peg he thought in that same lifeless
manner that it must be very early yet; but when he looked at
.p108
the watch on his table he saw both hands arrested at twelve
o'clock. 
   {op"}Ah! Yes," he mumbled to himself and as if beginning to
get roused a little he took a survey of his room. The paper
stabbed to the wall arrested his attention. He eyed it from
the distance without approval or perplexity; but when he heard
the servant girl beginning to bustle about in the outer room
with the samovar for his morning tea, he walked up to it and took 
it down with an air of profound indifference. 
   While doing that he glanced down at the bed on which he
had not slept that night. The hollow in the pillow made by the
weight of Haldin's head was very noticeable. 
   Even his anger at this sign of the man's passage was
dull. He did not try to nurse it into life. He did nothing
all that day; he neglected even to brush his hair. The idea
of going out never occurred to him{ -- }and if he did not start a
connected train of thought it was not because he was unable to
think. It was because he was not interested enough.
.p109 
   He yawned frequently. He drank large quantities of tea,
he walked about aimlessly and whenever he sat down he did not
budge for a long time. He spent some time drumming on the
window with his finger-tips quietly. In his unenergetic
wanderings round about the table he caught sight of his own face
in the looking-glass and that arrested him. The eyes which
returned his stare were the most unhappy eyes
he had ever seen. And that was the first thing that disturbed
the mental stagnation of that day. 
   He was not affected personally. He merely thought that
life without happiness is impossible. What was happiness.
He yawned and went on shuffling about and about between the
walls of his room. Looking forward was happiness{ -- }that's
all{ -- }nothing more. To look forward to the gratification of
some desire, to the gratification of some passion, love,
ambition, hate{ -- }hate too indubitably. Love and hate. And to
escape the dangers of existence, to live without fear was also
happiness. There was nothing else. Absence of fear{ -- }
looking forward. {op"}Oh! the miserable lot of humanity" he exclaimed
.p110
mentally: and added at once in his thought: {op"}I ought to be
happy enough as far as that goes." But he was not excited by
that assurance. On the contrary, he yawned again as he had
been yawning all that day. He was mildly surprised to
discover himself being overtaken by night. The room grew dark
swiftly though time had seemed to stand still. How was it that
he had not noticed the passing of that day? Of course it was
the watch being stopped . . . 
   He did not light his lamp but went over to the bed and
threw himself on it without any hesitation. Lying on his back
he put his hands under his head and stared upward. After a
moment he thought: {op"}I am lying here like that man. I wonder
if he slept while I was struggling with the blizzard in the
streets. No, he did not sleep. But why should I not sleep?"
and he felt the silence of the night press upon all his limbs
like a weight. 
   In the calm of the hard frost outside, the clear cut
strokes of the town clock counting off midnight penetrated the
.p111
quietness of his suspended animation. 
   Again he began to think. It was twenty-fours since that
man left his room. Razumov had a distinct feeling that
Haldin in the fortress was sleeping that night. It was a
certitude which made him angry because he did not want to
think of Haldin, but he justified it to himself by physiological
and psychological reasons. The fellow had hardly slept for
weeks on his own confession and now every incertitude was at
an end for him. No doubt he was looking forward to the
consummation of his martyrdom. A man who resigns himself to
kill need not go very far for resignation to die. Haldin
slept perhaps more soundly than General T{---} whose task{ -- }weary
work too{ -- }was not done and over whose head hung the sword of
revolutionary vengeance. 
   Razumov remembering the thick-set man with his heavy jowl
resting on the collar of his uniform; the champion of
autocracy, who had let no sign of surprise, incredulity or joy
escape him, but whose goggle eyes could express a mortal hatred
of all rebellion{ -- }Razumov moved uneasily on the bed.
.p112 
   {op"}He suspected me" he thought. {op"}I suppose he must suspect
everybody. He would be capable of suspecting his own wife,
if Haldin had gone to her boudoir with his confession." 
   Razumov sat up in anguish. Was he to remain a political
suspect all his days? Was he to go through life as a man not
to be wholly trusted{ -- }with a bad secret police note tacked on
to his record? What sort of future could he look forward to? 
   {op"}I am now a suspect" he thought again; but the habit of
reflection and that desire of safety, of an ordered life, which
was so strong in him came to his assistance as the night wore
on. His quiet, steady and laborious existence would vouch at
length for his loyalty. There were many permitted ways to
serve one's country. There was an activity that made for
progress without being revolutionary. The field of influence was
great and infinitely varied{ -- }once one had conquered a name. 
   His thought like a circling bird reverted after four and
twenty hours to the silver medal, and as it were, poised itself
there. When the day broke he had not slept, not for a moment,
but he got up not very tired and quite sufficiently self-
.p113
possessed for all practical purposes. 
   He went out and attended three lectures in the morning.
But the work in the library was a mere dumb snow of research.
He sat with many volumes open before him trying to make notes{ -- }
and extracts. His new tranquility was like a flimsy garment
and seemed to float at the mercy of a casual word. Betrayal!
Why! the fellow had done all that was necessary to betray
himself. Precious little had been needed to deceive him. 
   {op"}I have said no word to him that was not strictly true.
Not one word"{ -- }Razumov argued with himself. 
   Once engaged on this line of thought there could be no
question of doing useful work. The same ideas went on passing
through his mind and he pronounced mentally the same words over
and over again. He shut up all the books and rammed all his
papers into his pocket with convulsive movements, raging
inwardly against Haldin. 
   As he was leaving the library a long bony student in a
threadbare overcoat joined him, stepping moodily by his side.
Razumov answered his mumbled greeting without looking at him at
all. 
   {op"}What does he want with me" he thought with a strange
.p114
dread of the unexpected which he tried to shake off lest it
should fasten itself upon his life for good and all. And the
other muttering cautiously with downcast eyes supposed that
his comrade had seen the news of de P{---}'s executioner{ -- }that was
the expression he used{ -- }having been arrested the night before
last . . . 
   {op"}I've been ill{ -- }shut up in my rooms," Razumov mumbled
through his teeth. 
   The tall student raising his shoulders, shoved his hands deep into his pockets.
He had a hairless square tallowy
chin which trembled slightly as he spoke, and his nose nipped
bright red by the sharp air looked like a false nose of painted
cardboard between the sallow cheeks. His whole
appearance was stamped with the mark of cold and hunger. He stalked
deliberately at Razumov's elbow with his eyes on the ground. 
   {op"}It's an official statement," he continued in the same
cautious mutter. {op"}It may be a lie. But there was somebody
arrested between midnight and one in the morning on Tuesday.
This is certain."
.p115 
   And talking rapidly under the cover of his downcast air, he
told Razumov that this was known through an inferior government
clerk employed at the Central Secretariat. That man belonged
to one of the revolutionary circles. {op"}The same in fact I am
affiliated to," remarked the student.
   They were crossing a wide quadrangle. An infinite
distress possessed Razumov, annihilated his energy and before his
eyes everything appeared confused and as if evanescent. He
dared not leave the fellow there. {op"}He may be affiliated to
the police"{ -- }was the thought that passed through his mind.
{op"}Who could tell?" But eyeing the miserable frost-nipped,
famine-struck figure of his companion he perceived the absurdity
of his suspicion. 
   {op"}But I{ -- }you know{ -- }I don't belong to any circle. I . . . " 
   He dared not say any more. Neither dared he mend his pace.
The other raising and setting down his lamentably shod feet
with exact deliberation protested in a low tone that it was not
necessary for everybody to belong to an organization. The
.p116
most valuable personalities remained outside.
Some of the best work was done outside the organization.
Then very fast, with whispering feverish lips: 
   {op"}The man arrested in the street was Haldin." 
   And accepting Razumov's dismayed silence as natural enough
he assured him that there was no mistake. That government
clerk was on night duty at the Secretariat. Hearing a great
noise of footsteps in the hall and aware that political
prisoners were brought over sometimes at night from the fortress
he opened the door of the room in which
he was working, suddenly. Before the gendarme on duty could push him back and
slam the door in his face, he had seen a prisoner being partly
carried, partly dragged along the hall by a lot of policemen. He was
being used very brutally. And the clerk had recognised Haldin
perfectly. Less than half an hour afterwards General T{---}
arrived at the Secretariat to examine that prisoner personally. 
   {op"}Aren't you astonished" concluded the gaunt student. 
   {op"}No" said Razumov brutally{ -- }and at once regretted his
answer.
.p117 
   {op"}Everybody supposed Haldin was in the provinces{ -- }with his
people. Didn't you?" 
   The student turned his big hollow eyes upon Razumov, who
said unguardedly: 
   {op"}His people are abroad." 
   He could have bitten his tongue out with vexation. The
student pronounced in a tone of profound meaning: 
   {op"}So! You alone were aware . . . " and stopped. 
   {op"}They have sworn my ruin" thought Razumov. 
   {op"}Have you spoken of this to anyone else?" he asked with
bitter curiosity. 
   The other shook his head. 
   {op"}No, only to you. Our circle thought that as Haldin
had been often heard expressing a warm appreciation of
your character . . . " 
   Razumov could not restrain a gesture of angry despair which
the other must have mis-understood in some way because he ceased
speaking and turned away his black, lack-lustre eyes. 
   They moved side by side in silence. Then the gaunt
.p118
student began to whisper again, with averted gaze.
   {op"}As we have at present no one affiliated inside the fortress
so as to make it possible to furnish him with a packet of
poison, we have considered already some sort of retaliatory
action{ -- }to follow very soon . . . " 
   Razumov trudging on interrupted: 
   {op"}Were you acquainted with Haldin? Did he know where you
live?" 
   {op"}I had the happiness to hear him speak twice" his companion
answered in the feverish whisper contrasting with the gloomy
apathy of his face and bearing. {op"}He did not know where I
live . . .  I am lodging poorly . . .  with an artizan family . . .  I
have just a corner in a room. It is not very practicable to see me there
but if you should need me for anything I am ready. . . . " 
   Razumov trembled with rage and fear. He was beside
himself but kept his voice low. 
   {op"}You are not to come near me. You are not to speak to me.
Never address a single word to me. I forbid you."
.p119 
   {op"}Very well," said the other submissively, showing no
surprise whatever at this abrupt prohibition. {op"}You don't wish
for secret reasons. . . .  perfectly. . . .  I understand." 
   He edged away at once, not looking up even; and Razumov saw
his gaunt, shabby, famine-stricken figure cross the street
obliquely with lowered head and that peculiar exact motion of
the feet. 
   He watched him as one would watch a vision out of a
nightmare, then he continued on his way, trying not to think. On
his landing the landlady seemed to be waiting for him. She was
a short, thick, shapeless woman with a large yellow face wrapped
up everlastingly in a black woollen shawl. When she saw him
come up the last flight of stairs she flung both her arms up
excitedly, then clasped her hands before her face. 
   {op"}Kirylo Sidorovitch{ -- }little father{ -- }what have you been
doing! And such a quiet young man too. The police are just
gone this moment after searching your rooms." 
   Razumov gazed down at her with silent, scrutinising
attention. Her puffy yellow countenance was working with
.p120
emotion. She screwed up her eyes at him entreatingly. 
   {op"}Such a sensible young man. Anybody can see you are
sensible. And now{ -- }like this{ -- }all at once . . .  What is the
good of mixing yourself up with these Nihilists. Do give over{ -- }
little father. They are unlucky people." 
   Razumov moved his shoulders slightly. 
   {op"}Or is it that some secret enemy has been calumniating you
Kirylo Sidorovitch? The world is full of black hearts and
false denunciations nowadays. There is much fear about." 
   {op"}Have you heard that I have been denounced by someone?"
asked Razumov, without taking his eyes off her quivering face. 
   But she had not heard anything. She had tried to find out by asking
the police Captain while his men were turning the room upside
down. The police Captain of the district had known her for the
last eleven years and was a humane person. But he said to her
on the landing looking very black and vexed: 
   {op"}My good woman, do not ask questions. I don't know
anything myself. The order comes from higher quarters."
.p121 
   And indeed there had come shortly after the arrival of the
policemen of the district a very superior gentleman in a fur
coat and a shiny hat, who sat down in the room and looked through
all the papers himself. He came alone and went away by himself,
taking nothing with him. She had been trying to put things
straight a little since they left. 
   Razumov turned away brusquely and entered his rooms. 
   All his books had been shaken and thrown on the
floor. His landlady  followed him and stooping painfully,
began to pick them up into her apron. His papers and notes
which were kept always neatly sorted (they all related to his
studies) had been all shuffled up and heaped together into a
ragged pile in the middle of the table. 
   This disorder affected him profoundly, unreasonably. He
sat down and stared. He had a distinct sensation of his very
existence being undermined in some mysterious manner, of his
moral supports falling away from him one by one. He even
experienced a slight physical giddiness and made a movement as if
.p122
to reach for something to steady himself
with. 
   The old woman rising to her feet with a low groan shot all
the books she had collected in her apron on to the sofa and left
the room muttering and sighing. 
   It was only then that he noticed that the sheet of paper
which for one night had remained stabbed to the wall above his
empty bed was lying on top of the pile. 
   When he had taken it down the day before he had folded it in
four absent-mindedly before dropping it on the table. And now
he saw it lying uppermost, spread out, smoothed out even and
covering all the confused pile of pages,the record of his
intellectual life for the last three years. It had not been flung
there. It had been placed there{ -- }smoothed out too! He
guessed in that an intention{ -- }a profound meaning{ -- }or perhaps
some inexplicable mockery. 
   He sat staring at the piece of paper till his eyes began to
smart.
.p123
He did not
attempt to put his papers in order, either that evening or the
next day{ -- }which he spent at home in a state of peculiar
irresolution. This irresolution bore upon the question whether he
should continue to live{ -- }neither more or less. But its
nature was very far removed from the hesitation of a man
contemplating suicide. The idea of laying violent hands upon his
body did not occur to Razumov. The unrelated organism bearing
that label, walking, breathing, wearing these clothes, was of no
importance to anyone, unless maybe to the landlady. The true
Razumov had his being in the willed, in the determined future{ -- }
in that future menaced by the lawlessness of autocracy{ -- }for
autocracy knows no law{ -- }and the lawlessness of revolution.
The feeling that his moral personality was at the mercy of these
lawless forces was so strong that he asked himself seriously if
it were worth while to go on accomplishing the mental functions
of that existence which seemed no longer his own. 
   {op"}What is the good of exerting my intelligence, of pursuing
.p124
the systematic development of my faculties and all my plans of
work"{ -- }he asked himself. {op"}I want to guide my conduct by
reasonable convictions, but what security have I against something{ -- }
some destructive horror{ -- }walking in upon me as I sit here . . . " 
   Razumov looked apprehensively towards the door of the
outer room as if expecting some shape of evil to turn the handle
and appear before him silently. 
   {op"}A common thief" he said to himself{ -- }{op"}finds more guarantees
in the law he is breaking, and even a brute like Ziemianitch
has his consolation." Razumov envied the materialism of the
thief and the passion of the incorrigible old man. The
consequences of their actions were always clear and their lives
remained their own. 
   But he slept as soundly that night as though he had been
consoling himself in the manner of Ziemianitch. He dropped
off suddenly, lay like a log, remembered no dream on waking.
But it was as if his soul had gone out in the night to gather
the flowers of wrathful wisdom. He got up in a mood of grim
determination and as if with a new knowledge of his own nature.
.p125
He looked mockingly on the heap of papers on his table; and
left his room to attend the lectures he muttering to himself:
{op"}We shall see." 
   He was in no humour to talk to anybody or hear himself
questioned as to his absence from lectures the day before. But
it was difficult to repulse rudely a very good comrade with a
smooth pink face and fair hair, bearing the nick-name amongst
his fellow students of {op"}Madcap Kostia." He was the idolised
only son of a very wealthy and illiterate Government contractor, and
attended the lectures only during the periodical fits of contrition
following upon tearful paternal remonstrances. Noisily
blundering like a retriever puppy, his elated voice and great gestures
filled the bare academy corridors with the joy of thoughtless
animal life; provoking indulgent smiles at a great distance. His
usual discourses treated of trotting horses, wine-parties in
expensive restaurants and the merits of persons of easy virtue,
with a disarming artlessness of outlook. He pounced upon Razumov
about midday somewhat less uproariously than his habit was, and
led him aside.
.p126 
   {op"}Just a moment, Kirylo Sidorovitch. A few words here in
this quiet corner." 
   He felt Razumov's reluctance and insinuated his hand under his
arm caressingly. 
   {op"}No{ -- }pray do. I don't want to talk to you about any of
my silly scrapes. What are my scrapes? Absolutely nothing.
Mere childishness. The other night I flung a fellow out of a
certain place where I was having a fairly good time. A
tyrannical little beast of a quill-driver from the Treasury 
department . . . . He was bullying the people of the house. I rebuked him.
{op'}You are not behaving humanely to God's creatures that are a
jolly sight more estimable than yourself' I said. I can't
bear to see any tyranny, Kirylo Sidorovitch. Upon my word I
can't. He didn't take it in good part at all. {op'}Who's that
impudent puppy?' he begins to shout. I was in excellent form
as it happened, and he went through the closed window very
suddenly. He flew quite a long way into the yard. I raged
like{ -- }like a{ -- }a minotaur. The women clung to me and
.p127
screamed, the fiddlers got under the table. . . . Such fun! My dad
had to put his hand pretty deep into his pocket: I can tell you." 
   He chuckled. 
   {op"}My dad is a very useful man. Jolly good thing it is
for me too. I do get into unholy scrapes." 
   His elation fell. That was just it. What was his life?
Insignificant; no good to anyone; a mere festivity. It would
end some fine day in his getting his skull split with a
champagne bottle in a drunken brawl. At such times too when men
were sacrificing themselves to ideas. But he could never get
any ideas into his head. His head wasn't worth anything better
than to be split by a champagne bottle. 
   Razumov protesting that
he had no time, made an attempt to get away. The other's tone
changed to confidential earnestness. 
   {op"}For God's sake, Kirylo, my dear soul, let me make some
sort of sacrifice. It would not be a sacrifice really. I
have my rich dad behind me. There's positively no getting to the
bottom of his pocket."
.p128 
   And rejecting indignantly Razumov's suggestion that this
was drunken raving, he offered to lend him some money to
escape abroad with. He could always get money from his dad. He
had only to say that he had lost it at cards or something of
that sort, and at the same time promise solemnly not to miss a
single lecture for three months on end. That would fetch the
old man; and he, Kostia, was quite equal to the sacrifice.
Though he really did not see what was the good for him to attend
the lectures. It was perfectly hopeless. 
   {op"}Won't you let me be of some use?" he pleaded to the silent
Razumov, who with his eyes on the ground and utterly unable to
penetrate the real drift of the other's intention, felt a
strange reluctance to clear up the point. 
   {op"}What makes you think I want to go abroad?" he asked at
last very quietly. 
   Kostia lowered his voice. 
   {op"}You had the police in your rooms yesterday. There are
three or four of us who have heard of that. Never mind how we
know. It is sufficient that we do. So we have been consulting
.p129
together." 
   {op"}Ah! You got to know that already," muttered Razumov 
negligently. 
   {op"}Yes. We did. And it struck us that a man like you . . . " 
   {op"}What sort of man do you take me to be?" Razumov
interrupted him. 
   {op"}A man of ideas{ -- }and a man of action too. But you are
very deep, Kirylo. There's no getting to the bottom of your
mind. Not for fellows like me. But we all agreed that you
must be preserved for our country. Of that we have no doubt
whatever{ -- }I mean all of us who have heard Haldin speak of you on
certain occasions. A man doesn't get the police ransacking his
rooms without there being some devilry hanging over his head. . . .
And so if you think that it would be better for you to bolt at
once . . . " 
   Razumov tore himself away and walked down the corridor,
leaving the other motionless with his mouth open. But almost
at once he returned and stood before the amazed Kostia, who shut
.p130
his mouth slowly. Razumov looked him straight in the eyes, before
saying with marked deliberation and separating his words: 
   {op"}I thank{ -- }you{ -- }very{ -- }much." 
   He went away again rapidly. Kostia recovering from his
surprise at these manoeuvres ran up behind him pressingly. 
   {op"}No! Wait! Listen. I really mean it. It would be
like giving your compassion to a starving fellow. Do you hear,
Kirylo? And any disguise you may think of, that too, I could
procure from a costumier, a Jew I know. Let a fool be made
serviceable according to his folly. Perhaps also a false beard
or something of that kind may be needed." 
   Razumov turned at bay. 
   {op"}There are no false beards needed in this business, Kostia{ -- }
you good-hearted lunatic, you. What do you know of my ideas?
My ideas may be poison to you." 
   The other began to shake his head in energetic protest. 
   {op"}What have you got to do with ideas. Some of them would
make an end of your dad's money-bags. Leave off meddling with
.p131
what you don't understand. Go back to your trotting horses and
your girls, and then you'll be sure at least of doing no harm
to anybody, and hardly any to yourself." 
   The enthusiastic youth was overcome by this disdain. 
   {op"}You're sending me back to my pig's trough, Kirylo. That
settles it. I am an unlucky beast{ -- }and I shall die like a
beast too. But mind{ -- }it's your contempt that has done for me." 
   Razumov went off with long strides. That this simple
and grossly festive soul should have fallen too under the
revolutionary curse affected him as an ominous symptom of the time.
He reproached himself for feeling troubled. Personally he ought
to have felt re-assured. There was an obvious advantage in
this conspiracy of mistaken judgment taking him for what he was
not. But was it not strange! 
   Again he experienced that sensation of his conduct being
taken out of his hands by Haldin's revolutionary tyranny. His
solitary and laborious existence had been destroyed{ -- }the only
thing he could call his own on this earth. By what right," he
asked himself furiously. In what name?
.p132 
   What infuriated him most was to feel that the {op"}thinkers"
of the University were evidently connecting him with Haldin{ -- }
as a sort of confidant in the background apparently. A
mysterious connection! Ha, ha!. . . .  He had been made a personage of
without knowing anything about it. How that wretch Haldin
must have talked about him! Yet it was likely that Haldin had said very little.
The fellow's casual utterances were caught up and treasured and
pondered over by all these imbeciles. And was not all secret
revolutionary action based upon folly, self-deception and lies! 
   {op"}Impossible to think of anything else," muttered Razumov to
himself. {op"}I'll become an idiot if this goes on. The 
scoundrels and the fools are murdering my intelligence." 
   He lost all hope of saving his future which depended on the
free use of his intelligence. 
   He reached the doorway of his house in a state of mental
discouragement which enabled him to receive with apparent
indifference an official-looking envelope from the dirty hand of
the dvornik.
.p133 
   {op"}A gendarme brought it"said the man. {op"}He asked if you
were at home. I told him no, {op'}he's not at home'. So he left
it. {op'}Give it into his own hands'{ -- }says he. Now you've got it-
eh?" 
   He went back to his sweeping and Razumov
climbed his stairs, envelope in hand. Once in his room he
did not hasten to open it. 
Of course, this
official missive was from the superior direction of the police.
A suspect! A suspect! 
.p133
   He stared in dreary astonishment at the absurdity of his
position. He thought with a sort of dry unemotional melancholy;
three years of good work gone, the course of forty more perhaps
jeopardised{ -- }turned from hope to terror, because events started
by human folly link themselves into a sequence which no sagacity
can foresee and no courage can break through. Fatality enters
your rooms while your landlady's back is turned; you come home
.p134
and find it in possession bearing a man's name, clothed in flesh{ -- }
wearing a brown cloth coat and long boots{ -- }lounging against the
stove. It asks you {op"}Is the outer door closed?"{ -- }and you
don't know enough to take it by the throat and fling it
down-stairs. You don't know. You welcome the crazy fate. {op"}Sit
down"{ -- }you say. And it is all over. You cannot shake it off
any more. It will cling to you for ever. Neither halter nor
bullet can give you back the freedom of your life and the sanity
of your thought. . . .  It was enough to dash one's head against a
wall. 
   Razumov looked slowly all round the walls as if to select a
spot to dash his head against. Then he opened the letter. It
directed the student Kirylo Sidorovitch Razumov to present himself
without delay at the General Secretariat. 
   Razumov had a vision of General T{---}'s goggle-eyes waiting for him{ -- }
the embodied power of autocracy, grotesque and terrible. He
embodied the whole power of autocracy, grotesque and terrible. He
the whole power of autocracy because he was its guardian.
He was the incarnate suspicion, the incarnate anger, the
incarnate ruthlessness of a political and social regime on its
.p135
defence. He loathed rebellion by instinct. And Razumov
reflected that the man was simply unable to understand a reasonable
adherence to the doctrine of absolutism. 
.p136
   {op"}What can he want with me precisely{ -- }I wonder?" he asked
himself. 
   As if that mental question had evoked the familiar phantom,
Haldin stood suddenly before him in the room with an
extraordinary completeness of detail. Though the short winter day had
passed already into the sinister twilight of a land buried in
snow Razumov saw plainly the narrow leather strap round the Tcherkess
coat. The illusion of that hateful presence was so perfect
that he half expected it to ask{ -- }{op'}Is the outer door closed?'
He looked at it with hatred and contempt. Souls do not take a
shape of clothing. Moreover Haldin could not be dead yet.
Razumov stepped forward menacingly; the vision vanished{ -- }and
turning short on his heel he walked out of his room with infinite
disdain.
.p137
But after going down calmly the first flight of stairs it
occurred to him that perhaps the superior authorities of police meant
to confront him with Haldin in the flesh. This thing struck
him like a bullet{ -- }and had he not clung with both hands to the
bannister he would have rolled down to the next landing most
likely. His legs were of no use for a considerable time . . . But
why? For what conceivable reason? To what end? 
   There could be no rational answer to these questions; but 
Razumov remembered the promise made by the General to Prince K{---}. His
action was to remain unknown. 
   He got down to the bottom of the stairs lowering himself
as it were from step to step, by the bannister. Under the gate
.p138
he regained much of his firmness of thought and limb. He went
out into the street without staggering visibly. Every moment he
felt steadier mentally. And yet he was saying to himself that
General T{---}was perfectly capable of shutting him up in the
fortress for an indefinite time.  His temperament fitted his
remorseless task and his omnipotence made him inaccessible
to reasonable argument. 
   But when Razumov arrived at the Secretariat he discovered
that he would have nothing to do with General T{---}. It is
evident from Mr Razumov's diary that this dreaded personality was to
remain in the background. A civilian of superior rank received
him in a private room after a period of waiting in outer offices
where a lot of scribbling went on at many tables in a heated and
stuffy atmosphere. 
   The clerk in uniform who conducted him said in the corridor:
.p139 
   {op"}You are going before Gregory Matvieitch Mikulin." 
   There was nothing formidable about the man bearing that
name. His mild expectant glance was turned on the door already
when Razumov entered. At once, with the penholder he was
holding in his hand, he pointed to a deep sofa between two windows.
He followed Razumov with his eyes while that last crossed the
room and sat down. The mild gaze rested on him, not curious,
not inquisitive{ -- }certainly not suspicious{ -- }almost without
expression. In its passionless persistence there was
something resembling sympathy. 
   Razumov who had prepared his will and his intelligence to
encounter General T{---} himself was profoundly troubled. All the
moral bracing up against the possible excesses of power and
passion went for nothing
before this sallow
man who wore a full unclipped beard. It was
fair, thin, and very fine. The light fell in coppery gleams
on the protuberances of a high rugged forehead. And the aspect
.p140
of the flat soft physiognomy was so homely and rustic that the
careful middle parting of the hair seemed a
pretentious affectation. 
   The diary of Mr Razumov testifies to some irritation on
his part. I may remark here that the diary proper consisting of
the more or less daily entries seems to have been begun on that
very evening after Mr Razumov had returned home. 
   Mr Razumov, then, was irritated. His strung up individuality
.p141
had gone to pieces within him very suddenly. 
   {op"}I must be very prudent with him," he warned himself
in the silence during which they sat gazing at each other. It
lasted some little time and was characterised (for silences
have their character) by a sort of sadness imparted to it
perhaps by the mild and thoughtful manner of the bearded official.
Razumov learned later that he was the chief of a department in
the third section of the Secretariat, with a rank in the civil
service equivalent to that of Colonel in the army. 
   Razumov's mistrust became acute. The main point was, not
to be drawn into saying too much. He had been called there for
some reason. What reason? To be given to understand that he
was a suspect{ -- }and also no doubt to be pumped. As to what
.p142
precisely? There was nothing. Or perhaps Haldin had been
telling lies. . . .  Every alarming uncertainty beset Razumov. He
could bear the silence no longer and cursing himself for his
weakness spoke first, though he had promised himself not to do
so on any account. 
   {op"}I haven't lost a moment's time" he began in a hoarse,
provoking tone; and then the faculty of speech seemed to leave
him and enter the body of Councillor Mikulin who chimed in
approvingly. 
   {op"}Very proper. Very proper. Though as a matter of fact . . . "
   But the spell was broken and Razumov interrupted him boldly
under a sudden conviction that this was the safest attitude to
take. With a great flow of words he complained of being totally
misunderstood. Even as he talked with a perception of his own
audacity he thought that the word {op"}misunderstood" was better
than the word {op"}mistrusted" and he repeated it again with
insistence. 
.p143
Suddenly he ceased, being seized with fright before the
attentive immobility of the official. {op"}What am I talking about"
he thought, eyeing him with a vague gaze. Mistrusted{ -- }not
misunderstood, was the right symbol for these people.
Misunderstood was the other kind of curse. Both had been brought on
his head by that fellow Haldin. And his head ached terribly.
He passed his hand over his brow{ -- }an involuntary gesture of
suffering, which he was too careless to restrain. At that
moment Razumov beheld his own brain suffering on the rack{ -- }a
long pale figure drawn asunder horizontally with terrific force
in the darkness of a vault and whose face he failed to see. It
was as though he had dreamed for an infinitesimal fraction of
.p144
time of some dark print of the Inquisition . . . 
.p145
   It is not to be seriously supposed
that Razumov had actually dozed off and had dreamed in the presence of
Councillor Mikulin, of an old print of the Inquisition. He was
indeed extremely exhausted, and he records a remarkably
dream-like impression of anguish at the circumstance that there was no
one whatever near the pale and extended figure. The solitude
of the racked victim was particularly horrible to behold. The
mysterious impossibility to see the face, he also notes, inspired
a sort of terror.
All these characteristics of an ugly
dream were present. Yet he is certain that he never lost the
consciousness of himself on the sofa, leaning forward with his
hands between his knees and turning his cap round and round in his
fingers. But everything vanished at the voice of Councillor
Mikulin. Razumov felt profoundly grateful for the even
simplicity of its tone. 
   {op"}Yes. I have listened with interest. I comprehend
in a measure your. . . .  But indeed you are mistaken in what you . ."
Councillor Mikulin uttered a series of broken sentences.
.p146
Instead of finishing them he glanced down his beard. It was
a deliberate curtailment which somehow made the phrases more
impressive. But he could talk fluently enough as became
apparent when changing his tone to persuasiveness he went on.
{op"}By listening to you as I did, I think I have proved
that I do not regard our intercourse as strictly official. In
fact I don't want it to have that character at all . . .  Oh yes!
I admit that the request for your presence here had an official
form. But I put it to you whether it was a form which would
have been used to secure the attendance of a . . . . " 
   {op"}Suspect," exclaimed Razumov. looking straight into the
official's eyes. They were big with heavy eyelids and met his
boldness with a dim, steadfast gaze. {op"}A suspect." The open
repetition of that word which had been haunting all his waking
hours gave Razumov a strange sort of 
satisfaction. Councillor
Mikulin shook his head slightly. {op"}Surely you do know that I've
had my rooms searched by the police?" 
   {op"}I was about to say a misunderstood person, when you
interrupted me" insinuated quietly Councillor Mikulin.
.p147 
   Razumov smiled without bitterness. The renewed sense of
his intellectual superiority sustained him in the hour of
danger. He said a little disdainfully: 
   {op"}I know I am but a reed. But I beg you to allow me the
superiority of the thinking reed over the unthinking forces that
are about to crush him out of existence. Practical thinking
in the last instance is but criticism. I may perhaps be
allowed to express my wonder at this action of the police being
delayed for two full days during which of course I could have
annihilated everything compromising by burning it{ -- }for instance{ -- }
and getting rid of the very ashes, for that matter." 
   {op"}You are angry," remarked the official, with an unutterable
simplicity of tone and manner. {op"}Is that reasonable?" 
   Razumov felt himself colouring with annoyance. 
   {op"}I am reasonable. I am even{ -- }permit me to say{ -- }a
thinker, though to be sure this name now-a-days seems to be the
monopoly of hawkers of revolutionary wares, the slaves of some
French or German thought{ -- }devil knows what foreign notions.
But I am not an intellectual mongrel. I think like a Russian.
.p148
I think faithfully{ -- }and I take the liberty to call myself a
thinker. It is not a forbidden word, as far as I know." 
   {op"}No. Why should it be a forbidden word?" Councillor
Mikulin turned in his seat
with crossed legs and resting his elbow on the table propped
his head on the knuckles of a half closed hand. Razumov
noticed a thick forefinger clasped by a massive gold band set with
a blood red stone{ -- }a signet ring that, looking as if it could
weigh half a pound, was an appropriate ornament for that
ponderous man with the accurate middle parting of glossy
hair above a rugged socratic forehead. 
   {op"}Could it be a wig?" Razumov detected himself wondering
with an unexpected detachment.
His self-confidence was
much shaken. He resolved to chatter no more. Reserve!
Reserve! All he had to do was to keep the Ziemianitch episode
secret with absolute determination, when the questions came.
Keep Ziemianitch strictly out of all the answers. 
   Councillor Mikulin looked at him dimly. Razumov's self-
.p149
confidence abandoned him completely. It seemed impossible to
keep Ziemianitch out. Every question would lead to that because
of course there was nothing else. He made an effort to brace
himself up. It was a failure. But Councillor Mikulin was
surprisingly detached too. 
   {op"}Why should it be forbidden," he repeated. {op"}I too consider
myself a thinking man, I assure you. The principal condition
is to think correctly. I admit it is difficult sometimes at
first for a young man abandoned to himself{ -- }with his generous
impulses undisciplined so to speak{ -- }at the mercy of every wild
wind that blows. Religious belief of course is a great. . . . "  
   Councillor Mikulin glanced down at his beard and Razumov,
whose tension was relaxed by that unexpected and discursive turn
murmured with gloomy discontent: 
   {op"}That man, Haldin, believed in God." 
   {op"}Ah! You are aware," breathed out Councillor Mikulin,
making the point softly, as if with discretion, but making it
nevertheless plainly enough, as if he too were put off his guard
by Razumov's remark. That last preserved an impassive moody
.p150
countenance. though he reproached himself bitterly for a
pernicious fool, to have given thus an utterly false impression
of intimacy. He kept his eyes on the floor. {op"}I must
positively hold my tongue unless I am obliged to speak," he admonished
himself. And at once against his will the question {op"}Hadn't I
better tell him everything" presented itself with such force
that he had to bite his lower lip. Councillor Mikulin could
not however have nourished any hope of confession. He went
on. 
   {op"}You tell me more than his judges were able to get out of
him. He was judged by a commission of three. He would tell
them absolutely nothing. I have the report of the interrogatories
here, by me. After every question there stands {op'}Refuses to
answer{ -- }refuses to answer." Its like that page after page. You see I have
been entrusted with some further investigations around and
about this affair. He has left me nothing to begin my
investigations on. A hardened miscreant. And so, you say, he
believed in. . . . "
.p151 
   Again Councillor Mikulin glanced at his beard with a faint
grimace; but he did not pause for long. Remarking with a shade
of scorn that blasphemers also had that sort of belief he
concluded by supposing that Mr Razumov had conversed frequently
with Haldin on the subject. 
   {op"}No" said Razumov loudly without looking up. {op"}He talked
and I listened. That is not a conversation." 
   {op"}Listening is a great art," observed Mikulin
parenthetically. 
   {op"}And getting people to talk is another" mumbled Razumov. 
   {op"}Well no{ -- }that is not very difficult" Mikulin said
innocently, {op"}except of course in special cases. For instance,
this Haldin. Nothing could induce him to talk. He was
brought four times before the delegated judges. Four secret
interrogatories{ -- }and even during the last, when your
personality was put forward . . . " 
   {op"}My personality put forward" repeated Razumov, raising his
head brusquely. {op"}I don't understand." 
   Councillor Mikulin turned squarely to the table and taking
.p152
up some sheets of grey foolscap dropped them one after
another, retaining only the last in his hand. He held it before
his eyes while speaking. 
   {op"}It was{ -- }you see{ -- }judged necessary. In a case of that
gravity no means or action upon the culprit should be
neglected. You understand that yourself, I am certain." 
   Razumov stared with enormous wide eyes at the side view of
Councillor Mikulin, who now was not looking at him at all. 
   {op"}So it was decided{ -- }I was consulted by General T{---}that a
certain question should be put to the accused. But in deference
to the earnest wishes of Prince K{---}your name has been kept out
of the documents and even from the very knowledge of the
judges themselves. Prince K{---}recognised the propriety, the
necessity of what we proposed to do but he was concerned for
your safety. Things do leak out{ -- }that we can't deny. One
cannot always answer for the discretion of inferior officials.
There was of course the secretary of the special tribunal{ -- }one or two gendarmes in the
room. Moreover, as I have said, in deference to Prince K{---}even the judges themselves were to be left in ignorance. The
.p153
question ready framed was sent to them by General T{---} (I wrote
it out with my own hand) with instructions to put it to the
prisoner the very last of all. Here it is." 
   Councillor Mikulin threw back his head into proper focus
and went on reading monotonously{ -- }{op"}Question{ -- }Has the man
well known to you, in whose rooms you remained for several hours
on Monday and on whose information you have been arrested{ -- }
has he had any previous knowledge of your intention to
commit a political murder?. . . .  Prisoner refuses to reply." 
   {op"}Question repeated. Prisoner preserves the same
stubborn silence." 
   {op"}The venerable Chaplain of the Fortress being then
admitted and exhorting the prisoner to repentance, entreating
him also to atone for his crime by an unreserved and full
confession which should help to liberate from the sin of rebellion
against the Divine laws and the sacred Majesty of the Ruler,
our Christ-loving land{ -- }the prisoner opens his lips for the
first time during this morning's audience and in a loud, clear
voice rejects the venerable Chaplain's ministrations."
.p154 
   {op"}At 11 o'clock the Court pronounces in summary form the
death sentence. 
   {op"}The execution is fixed for four o'clock in the afternoon,
subject to further instructions from superior authorities." 
   Councillor Mikulin dropped the page of foolscap, glanced
down his beard and turning to Razumov, added in an easy,
explanatory tone: 
   {op"}We saw no object in delaying the execution. The order
to carry out the sentence was sent by telegraph at noon. I
wrote out the telegram myself. He was hanged at four o'clock
this afternoon." 
.p155
.p156
   The definite information of Haldin's death gave Razumov
that feeling of general lassitude which follows a great
exertion or a great excitement. He kept very still on the sofa,
but a murmur escaped him. 
   {op"}He had a belief in a future existence." 
   Councillor Mikulin shrugged his shoulders slightly, and
Razumov got up with an effort. There was nothing now to stay
for in that room. Haldin had been hanged at four o'clock.
There could be no doubt of that. He had, it seemed, entered
upon his future existence, long boots, astrachan fur cap and all,
down to the very leather strap round his waist. A flickering
vanishing sort of existence. It was not his soul, it was his
mere phantom that he left behind on this earth{ -- }thought Razumov,
smiling caustically to himself while he crossed the room,
.p157
utterly forgetful of where he was and of Councillor Mikulin's
existence. This last could have set a lot of bells
ringing all over the building without leaving his chair. He
let Razumov come up quite to the door before he spoke. 
   {op"}Come, Kirylo Sidorovitch{ -- }what are you doing?" 
   Razumov turned his head and looked at him in silence. He
was not in the least disconcerted. Councillor Mikulin's arms
were stretched out on the table before him and his body leaned
forward a little with an effort of his dim gaze. 
   {op"}Was I actually going to clear out like this?" Razumov
wondered at himself with an impassive countenance. And he was
aware of this impassiveness concealing a lucid astonishment. 
   {op"}Evidently I was going out if he had not spoken," he
thought. {op"}What would he have done then? I must end this
affair one way or another. I must make him show his hand." 
   For a moment longer he reflected behind the mask as it were,
then let go the door handle and came back to the middle of the
room. 
   {op"}I'll tell you what you think," he said explosively, but
.p158
not raising his voice. {op"}You think that you are dealing with a
secret accomplice of that unhappy man. No, I do not know that
he was unhappy. He did not tell me. He was a wretch from my
point of view, because to keep alive a false idea is a greater
crime than to kill a man. I suppose you will not deny that?
I hated him! Visionaries work everlasting evil on earth.
Their Utopias inspire in the mass of mediocre minds a
disgust of reality and a contempt for the secular logic of
human development." 
   Razumov shrugged his shoulders and stared. {op"}What a tirade,"
he thought. The silence and immobility of Councillor Mikulin
impressed him. The bearded bureaucrat sat at his post,
mysteriously self-possessed like an idol with dim unreadable eyes.
Razumov's voice changed involuntarily. 
   {op"}If you were to ask me
where is the necessity of my hate for such Haldin, I would answer
.p159
you{ -- }there is nothing sentimental in it. I did not hate him
because he had committed the crime of murder. Abhorrence is not
hate. I hated him simply because I am sane. It is in that
character that he outraged me. His death . .  ." 
   Razumov felt his voice growing thick in his throat. The
dimness of Councillor Mikulin's eyes seemed to spread all over
his face and made it indistinct to Razumov's sight. He tried to
disregard these phenomena. 
   {op"}Indeed," he pursued, pronouncing each word carefully,
{op"}What is his death to me? 
If he were lying here on the floor I could walk over his breast . . . 
The fellow is a mere phantom. . . . " 
   Razumov's voice died out very much against his will.
Mikulin behind the table did not allow himself the slightest
movement. The silence lasted for some little time before Razumov
could go on again. 
   {op"}He went about talking of me. . . .  Those intellectual fellows
sit in each other's rooms and get drunk on foreign ideas in the
.p160
same way young Guard's officers treat each other with foreign
wines. Merest debauchery. . . .  Upon my word{ -- }" Razumov,
enraged by a sudden recollection of Ziemianitch lowered his
voice forcibly{ -- }{op"}Upon my word we Russians are a drunken lot.
Intoxication of some sort we must have: to get ourselves wild
with sorrow or maudlin with resignation; to lie inert like a
log or set fire to the house. What is a sober man to do, I
should like to know. To cut oneself entirely from one's kind
is impossible. To live in a desert one must be a saint.
But if a drunken man runs out of the grog shop, falls on your
neck and kisses you on both cheeks because something about your
appearance has taken his fancy, what then{ -- }kindly tell me?
You may break perhaps a cudgel on his back and yet not succeed
in beating him off . . . " 
   Councillor Mikulin raised his hand and passed it down his
face deliberately. 
   {op"}That's. . . .  of course" he said in an undertone. 
   The quiet gravity of that gesture made Razumov pause. It
.p161
was so unexpected too. What did it mean? It had an alarming aloofness.
Razumov remembered his intention of making him show his hand. 
   {op"}I have said all this to Prince K{---}' he began with assumed
indifference, but lost it on seeing Councillor Mikulin's slow
nod of assent. {op"}You know it? You've heard. . . .  Then why should
I be called here to be told of Haldin's execution. Did you want
to confront me with  his silence now that the man is dead?
What is his silence to me? This is incomprehensible. You
want in some way to shake my moral balance." 
   {op"}No. Not that," murmured Councillor Mikulin, just audibly.
{op"}The service you have rendered is appreciated . . . " 
   {op"}Is it?" interrupted Razumov ironically. 
   {op"}. . . . And your position too." Councillor Mikulin did not
raise his voice. {op"}But only think! You fall into Prince K{---}'s
study as if from the sky with your startling information . . .  You
.p162
are studying yet, Mr Razumov, but we are serving already, don't
forget that. . . .  And naturally some curiosity was bound to . . . "
   Councillor Mikulin looked down his beard. Razumov's lips
trembled. 
   {op"}An occurrence of that sort marks a man," the homely murmur
went on. {op"}I admit I was curious to see you. General T{---}
thought it would be useful too. . . .  Don't think I am incapable of
understanding your sentiments. When I was young like you I
studied . . . " 
   {op"}Yes{ -- }You wished to see me," said Razumov in a tone of
profound distaste. {op"}Naturally you have the right{ -- }I mean the
power. It all amounts to the same thing. But it is perfectly
useless, if you were to look at me and listen to me for a year.
I begin to think there is something about me which people don't
seem able to make out. It's unfortunate. I imagine, however,
that Prince K{---}understands. He seemed to." 
   Councillor Mikulin moved slightly and spoke: 
   {op"}Prince K{---}is aware of everything that is being done, and
I don't mind informing you that he approved my intention of
.p163
becoming personally acquainted with you." 
   Razumov concealed an immense disappointment under the
accents of railing surprise. 
   {op"}So he is curious too! . . .  Well{ -- }after all Prince K{---}knows
me very little. It is really very unfortunate for me but{ -- }it
is not exactly my fault." 
   Councillor Mikulin raised a hasty deprecatory hand and
inclined his head slightly over his shoulder.
   {op"}Now, Mr Razumov{ -- }is it necessary to take it in that way.
Everybody I am sure can. . . . " 
   He glanced rapidly down at his beard and when he looked
up again there was for a moment an interested expression in
his misty gaze. Razumov discouraged it with a cold, repellent,
smile. 
   {op"}No. That's of no importance to be sure{ -- }except that in
respect of all this curiosity being aroused by a very simple
matter . . What is to be done with it? It is unappeasable.
I mean to say there is nothing to appease it with. I happen
to have been born a Russian with patriotic instincts{ -- }whether
.p164
inherited or not I am not in a position to say." 
   Razumov spoke consciously with elaborate steadiness:
{op"}Yes, patriotic instincts developed in a conservative direction
by a faculty of independent thinking{ -- }of detached thinking.
In that respect I am more free than any social democratic
revolution could make me. It is more than probable that I don't
think exactly as you are thinking. Indeed, how could it be.
You would think most likely at this moment that I am elaborately
lying to cover up the track of my repentance." 
   Razumov stopped. His heart had grown too big for his
breast. Councillor Mikulin did not flinch. 
   {op"}Why so?" he said simply. {op"}I assisted personally at the
search of your rooms. I looked through all the papers myself.
I have been greatly impressed by a
sort of political confession of faith. A very remarkable
document. Now may I ask for what purpose. . . . " 
   {op"}To deceive the police naturally," said Razumov savagely. . . . 
{op"}What is all this mockery? Of course you can send me straight
from this room to Siberia. That would be intelligible. To
.p165
what is intelligible I can submit. But I protest against this
comedy of persecution. The whole affair is becoming too
comical altogether for my taste. A comedy of errors, phantoms
and suspicions. It's positively indecent . . . " 
   Councillor Mikulin turned an attentive ear. 
   {op"}Did you say phantoms?" he murmured. 
   {op"}I could walk over dozens of them." Razumov, with an
impatient wave of his hand, went on headlong: {op"}But, really,
I must claim the
right to be done once for all with that man. And in order to
accomplish this I shall take the liberty. . . . " 
   Razumov on his side of the table bowed slightly to the
seated bureaucrat.
{op"}. . . .  To retire{ -- }simply to retire." he finished with great resolution 
   He walked to the door, thinking, {op"}Now he must show his hand.
He must ring and have me arrested before I am out of the building,
or he must let me go. And either way. . . . "
   An unhurried voice said: 
   {op"}Kirylo Sidorovitch."
.p166
   Razumov at the door, turned his head.
   {op"}To retire," he repeated.
   {op"}Where to?" asked Councillor Mikulin softly.
   end of part first
   III
.p167 
{ti}Razumov. 
{pt}Part II 
{cn}I 
{cop}In the conduct of an invented story there are no doubt 
certain proprieties to be observed for the sake of clearness and 
effect. A man of imagination however inexperienced in the art 
of narrative, has his instinct to guide him in the 
choice of his words, and in the development of the action. A 
grain of talent excuses many mistakes. But this is not a work 
of imagination; I have no talent; my excuse for this undertaking 
lies not in its art but in its artlessness. Aware of my 
limitations and strong in the sincerity of my purpose, 
I would not try 
(were I able) to invent anything. I push my scruples so far 
that I would not even invent a transition. 
   Dropping then Mr Razumov's record 
at the point where Councillor Mikulin's question 
{op"}Where to?" comes 
with its air of an insoluble problem, I shall simply say that I 
made the acquaintance of these ladies about six months before 
that time. By {op"}these ladies" I mean of course, 
the mother and the 
sister of the unfortunate Haldin. 
   By what arguments he had induced his mother to sell their 
.p168 
little property and go abroad for an indefinite time, I cannot 
tell precisely. I have an idea that Mrs Haldin would have at 
her son's wish, set fire to her house and emigrated to the 
moon without any sign of surprise or apprehension; 
and that Miss Haldin{ -- }Nathalie, caressingly Natalka{ -- }would have given her assent 
to the scheme. 
   Their proud devotion to that young man became clear to me 
in a very short time. Following his directions they went 
straight to Switzerland{ -- }to Zurich{ -- }where they remained the
best part of a year. From Zurich, which they did not like, they 
came to Geneva. A friend of mine in Lausanne, a lecturer in 
history at the University, (he had married a Russian lady, a 
distant connection of Mrs Haldin's) wrote to me suggesting I 
should call on these ladies. It was a very kindly meant 
business suggestion. Miss Haldin wished to go through a course of 
reading the best English authors with a competent teacher. 
   Mrs Haldin received me very kindly. Her bad French, of 
which she was smilingly conscious, did away with the formality 
of the first interview. She was a tall woman in a black silk 
.p169 
dress. A wide brow, regular features and delicately cut lips, 
testified to her past beauty. She sat upright in an 
easy chair and in a rather weak, gentle voice told me that 
her Natalka simply thirsted after knowledge. Her thin hands 
were lying on her lap, her facial immobility had in it something 
monachal. {op"}In Russia," she went on, {op"}all knowledge was tainted 
with falsehood. Not chemistry and all that," she explained. 
The government corrupted the teaching for its own purposes. 
Both her children felt that. Her Natalka had obtained a 
diploma of a Superior School for women and her son was a student 
at the St. Petersburg University. He had a brilliant intellect, a 
most noble unselfish nature and he was the oracle of his comrades. 
Early 
next year, she hoped, he would join them and they would then 
go to Italy together. In any other country but 
their own she would have been certain of a great future for a man 
with the extraordinary abilities and the lofty character of her 
son{ -- }but in Russia. . . . " 
   The young lady sitting by the window turned her head and 
said: 
.p170 
   {op"}Come, mother. Even with us things change with years." 
   Her voice was deep, almost harsh, and yet caressing in its 
harshness. She had a dark complexion, with red lips and a full 
figure. She gave the impression of strong vitality. The 
old lady sighed. 
   {op"}You are both young{ -- }you two. It is easy for you to hope. 
But I too am not hopeless. Indeed how could I be with a son 
like this." 
   I addressed Miss Haldin, asking her what authors she wished 
to read. She directed upon me her grey eyes shaded by black 
eye-lashes and I became aware, notwithstanding my years, how 
attractive physically her personality could be to a man capable 
of appreciating something else in a woman than the mere grace of 
femininity. Her glance was as direct and trustful as that of a 
young man yet unspoiled by the world's wise lessons. And it was 
intrepid, but in this intrepidity there was nothing aggressive. 
A naive yet thoughtful assurance is a better definition. She 
had reflected already (in Russia the young begin to think early) 
.p171 
but she had never known deception as yet because obviously she 
had never yet fallen under the sway of passion. She was{ -- }to 
look at her was enough{ -- }very capable of being roused by the 
idea or simply by a person. At least, so I judged with I 
believe an unbiassed mind; For clearly my person could not be the 
person{ -- }and as to my ideas!. . . . 
   But we became excellent friends in the course of our reading. 
It was very pleasant. Without fear of provoking a smile I shall confess that I became very much attached to that young girl.  At
the end of four months I told her that now she could very well 
go on reading English by herself.  It was time for the teacher
to depart.  My pupil looked unpleasantly surprised.
  
.p172
   Mrs Haldin with her immobility of feature and 
kindly expression of the eyes, uttered from her arm-chair in her 
uncertain French: {op"}Mais l'ami reviendra." And so it was 
settled. I returned{ -- }not four times a week as before, but 
pretty frequently. In the autumn we made some short 
excursions together in company with other Russians. My friendship 
with these ladies had given me a standing in the Russian colony 
which otherwise I could not have had. 
   The day I saw in the papers the news of Mr de P{---}'s 
assassination{ -- }it was a Sunday{ -- }I met these 
ladies in the street 
and walked with them for some distance. Mrs Haldin wore a 
heavy grey cloak I remember over her black silk dress and her 
fine eyes met mine with a very quiet expression. 
   {op"}We have been to the late service," she said. {op"}Natalka 
came with me. Her girl-friends, the students here, of course 
don't. . . .  With us in Russia the church is so identified with 
oppression, that it seems almost necessary when one wishes to 
be free in this life, to give up all hope of a future existence. 
But I cannot give up praying for my son." 
.p173 
   She added with a sort of stony grimness, colouring slightly 
and in French: {op"}(Ce n'est peut etre qu'une habitude)"{ -- }It may 
be only habit." 
   Miss Haldin was carrying tho prayerbooks. She did not 
glance at her mother. 
   {op"}You and Viktor are both profound believers," she said. 
   I communicated to these ladies the news from their country 
which I had just read in a cafe. For a whole minute we walked 
together fairly briskly in silence. Then Mrs Haldin murmured: 
   {op"}There will be more trouble, more persecutions for this. 
They may be even closing the University. There is neither 
peace nor rest in Russia for one but in the grave." 
   {op"}Yes. The way is hard," came from the daughter, looking 
straight before her at the Chain of Jura covered with snow, like 
a white wall closing the end of the street. {op"}But concord is not 
so very far off." 
   {op"}That is what my children think," observed Mrs Haldin to me. 
   I did not conceal my feeling that these were strange times 
to talk of concord. Nathalie Haldin surprised me by saying as 
.p174 
if she had thought very much on the subject, that the occidentals 
did not understand the situation. She was very calm and 
youthfully superior. 
   {op"}You think it is a class conflict or a conflict of 
interests, as social contests are with you in Europe. But it is 
not that at all. It is something quite different." 
   {op"}It is quite possible that I don't understand," I admitted,.
That propensity of lifting every problem from the 
plane of the understandable by means of some sort of mystic 
expression is very Russian. I knew her well enough to have 
discovered her scorn for all the practical forms of political 
liberty known to the western world. I suppose one must be a 
Russian to understand Russian simplicity, a terrible corroding 
simplicity in which mystic phrases clothe a naive and hopeless 
cynicism. I think sometimes that the psychological secret of 
the profound difference is that that people detest life, the 
irremediable life of the earth as it is, whereas we westerners 
.p175 
cherish it with perhaps an equal exaggeration of its 
sentimental value. But this is a digression indeed. . . . 
   I helped these ladies into the tramcar and they asked me 
to call in the afternoon. At least Mrs Haldin asked me as she 
climbed up, and her Natalka smiled down at the dense westerner 
indulgently from the rear platform of the moving car. The light 
of the clear wintry forenoon was softened in her grey eyes. 
   Mr Razumov's record, like the open book of fate, revives 
for me the memory of that day as something startlingly pitiless 
in its freedom from all forebodings. Viktor Haldin was still 
with the living but with the living whose only contact with life 
is the expectation of death. He must have been already 
referring to the last of his earthly affections the hours of that 
obstinate silence, which for him was to be prolonged into 
eternity. That afternoon these ladies had a good many of their 
compatriots come to see them. More than was usual for them to 
receive at one time; and the drawing-room on the ground 
floor of a large house on the Boulevard des Philosophes was very 
much crowded. 
.p177 
   I outstayed everybody; and when.
When 
I rose Miss Haldin stood up too. I took her hand and was 
moved to revert to that morning's conversation in the street. 
   {op"}Admitting that we occidentals do not understand the 
character of your people. . . . " I began. 
   It was as if she had been prepared for me by some mysterious 
fore-knowledge. She checked me gently: 
.p178 
   {op"}Their impulses{ -- }their. . . . " 
she sought the proper expression 
and found it, but in French. . . .  
{op"}Their {it}mouvements d'a{cr}me{ro}." 
   Her voice was not much above a whisper. 
   {op"}Very well," I said. {op"}But still we are looking at a 
conflict. You say it is not a conflict of classes and not a 
conflict of interests. Suppose I admitted that. Are antagonistic 
ideas then to be reconciled more easily{ -- }can they be cemented 
with blood and violence into that concord which you proclaim to 
be so near?" 
   She looked at me searchingly with her clear grey eyes, 
without answering my reasonable question{ -- }my obvious, my 
unanswerable question. 
   {op"}It is inconceivable," I added, with something like 
annoyance. 
   {op"}Everything is inconceivable," she said. {op"}You and I{ -- }and 
Mother here are inconceivable to each other's cold reason. 
There are too many contradictory irreconcilable ideas implied 
in our existence. The whole world is inconceivable to the 
strict logic of ideas. And yet the world exists to our senses 
.p179 
and we exist in it. There must be a necessity superior to our 
conceptions. You are thinking of parliamentarism no doubt{ -- }which is not concord at all. It is a very miserable and a very false 
thing to belong to the majority. We Russians shall find some 
better form of national freedom than an artificial conflict of 
parties{ -- }which is wrong because it is a conflict and 
contemptible because it is artificial. It is left for us, Russians, 
to discover a better way." 
   Mrs Haldin had been looking out of the window. She turned 
upon me the almost lifeless beauty of her face and the living 
benign glance of her big dark eyes. 
   {op"}That's what my children think," she declared. 
.p180 
   {op"}I suppose," I addressed Miss Haldin{ -- }{op"}that 
you will be 
shocked if I tell you that I haven't understood{ -- }I won't say 
a single word; I've understood all the words. . . .  But what can 
be this era of disembodied concord you are looking forward to. 
Life is a thing of form. It has its plastic shape and a 
definite intellectual aspect. The most idealistic conceptions 
of love and forbearance must be clothed in flesh as it were 
before they can be made understandable." 
   I took my leave of Mrs Haldin whose beautiful lips never 
stirred. She smiled with her eyes only. Nathalie Haldin 
went with me as far as the door, very amiable. 
   {op"}Mother imagines that I am the slavish echo of my 
brother Viktor. It is not so. He understands me better than 
I can understand him. When he joins us and you come to know 
him you will see what an exceptional soul it is." She paused. 
   {op"}He is not a strong man in the conventional sense, you 
know," she added. {op"}But his character is without a flaw." 
   {op"}I believe that it will not be difficult for me to make 
.p181 
friends with your brother Viktor." 
   {op"}Don't expect to understand him quite," she said a little 
maliciously. {op"}He is not at all{ -- }at 
all{ -- }western at bottom." 
   And on this unnecessary warning I left the room with another
bow in the doorway to Mrs Haldin in her armchair by the window.
The shadow of autocracy all unperceived by me had already fallen
upon the Boulevard des Philosophes, in the free independent 
and democratic city of Geneva, where there is a quarter called La 
Petite Russie. Whenever two Russians come together the shadow 
of autocracy is with them, tinging their thoughts, their views, 
their most intimate feelings, their private life, their public 
utterances{ -- }haunting the secret of their silences. 
   What struck me next in the course of a week or so was the 
silence of these ladies. I used to meet them walking in the 
public garden near the University. They greeted me with their 
usual friendliness but I could not help noticing their 
taciturnity. By that time it was generally known 
that the assassin of 
M. de P{---} had been caught, judged and executed. So much had 
.p182 
been declared officially to the news agencies. But for the 
world at large he remained anonymous. The official secrecy had 
withheld his name from the public. I really cannot explain 
from what cause. 
   One day I saw Miss Haldin walking alone in the main alley of 
the Bastions under the naked trees. 
   {op"}Mother is not very well{ -- }" she explained. 
   As Mrs Haldin had, it seemed, never had a day's illness in 
her life this indisposition was disquieting. It was nothing 
definite too. 
   {op"}I think she is fretting because we have not heard from my 
brother for rather a long time." 
   {op"}No news{ -- }good news," I said cheerfully, and we began to 
walk slowly side by side. 
   {op"}Not in Russia," she breathed out so low that I only just 
caught the words. I looked at her with more attention. 
   {op"}You too are anxious," 
   She admitted after a moment of hesitation that she was. 
   {op"}It is really such a long time, since we heard . . .
.p183 
   And before I could offer the usual banal suggestions she 
confided in me. 
   {op"}Oh! But it is much worse than that. I wrote to a 
family we know in Petersburg. They had not seen him for more 
than a month. They thought he was already with us. They 
were even offended a little that he should have left Petersburg 
without calling on them. The husband of the lady went at once 
to his lodgings. Viktor had left there and they did not know 
his address." 
   I remember her catching her breath rather pitifully. Her 
brother had not been seen at lectures for a very long time either. 
He only turned up now and then at the University gate to ask the 
porter for his letters. And the gentleman friend was told that 
the last two letters received the student Haldin did not come to 
claim. But the police came to inquire if the student Haldin 
ever received any correspondence at the University and took them 
away. 
   {op"}My two last letters," she said 
   We faced each other. A few snowflakes 
.p184 
fluttered under the naked boughs. The sky was dark. 
   {op"}What do you think could have happened?" I asked. 
   Her shoulders moved slightly. 
   {op"}One can never tell{ -- }in Russia." 
   I saw then the shadow of autocracy lying upon Russian 
lives in their submission or their revolt. I saw it touch her 
handsome open face nestled in a fur collar and darken her clear 
eyes that shone upon me brilliantly grey in the murky light of 
a beclouded inclement afternoon. 
   {op"}Let us move," she said. {op"}It is cold standing{ -- }to-day." 
   She shuddered a little and stamped her little feet. We 
moved briskly to the end of the alley and back to the great 
gates of the garden. 
   {op"}Have you told your mother?" I ventured to ask. 
   {op"}No. Not yet. I came out to walk off the impression of 
this letter." 
   I heard a rustle of paper somewhere. It came from her 
muff. She had the letter with her in there. 
   {op"}What is it that you are afraid of?" I asked. 
.p185 
   To us Europeans of the West, all idea of political plots 
and conspiracies seem childish, crude, inventions for the 
theatre or a novel. I did not like to be more definite in my 
inquiry. 
   {op"}For us{ -- }for my mother specially, what I am afraid of is 
incertitude. People do disappear. Yes, they do disappear. 
I leave you to imagine what it is{ -- }the cruelty of the dumb 
weeks{ -- }months{ -- }years! This friend of ours has abandoned his 
inquiries when he heard of the police getting hold of the letters. 
I suppose he was afraid of compromising himself. He has a wife 
and children{ -- }and why should he after all. . . .  Moreover he is 
without influential connections and not rich. What could he do? 
. . . . Yes, I am afraid of silence{ -- }for my poor Mother. She 
won't be able to bear it. For my brother I am afraid of. . . ." 
She became almost indistinct, {op"}of anything." 
   We were now near the gate opposite the theatre. She 
raised her voice. 
   {op"}But lost people do turn up even in Russia. Do you know 
what my last hope is? Perhaps the next thing we know we shall 
.p186 
see him walking into our rooms." I raised my hat and she passed 
out of the gardens, graceful and strong, after a slight 
movement of the head to me, her hands in the muff, crumpling the 
cruel Petersburg letter. 
   On returning home I opened the newspaper I receive from 
London; and glancing down the correspondence from Russia{ -- }not 
the telegrams but the correspondence{ -- }the first thing that 
caught my eye was the name of Haldin. Mr de P{---}'s death was 
no longer an actuality but the enterprising correspondent was 
proud of having ferreted out some unofficial information about 
that fact of modern history. He had got hold of Haldin's name 
and had picked up the story of the midnight arrest in the 
street. But the sensation from a journalistic point of view 
was already well in the past. He did not allot to it more 
.p187 
than half a dozen lines out of a full column. It was quite 
enough to give me a sleepless night. I perceived that it 
would have been a sort of treason to let Miss Haldin come 
without preparation upon that journalistic discovery which would 
infallibly be reproduced on the morrow by French and Swiss 
newspapers. I had a very bad time of it till the morning, 
wakeful with nervous worry and nightmarish with the feeling of 
being mixed up with something theatrical and morbidly affected. 
The incongruity of such a complication in those two women's 
lives was sensible to me all night in the form of absolute 
anguish. It seemed due to their refined simplicity that it 
should remain concealed from them for ever. At an unconsciously 
early hour, at the door of their apartment I felt as if I were 
about to commit an act of vandalism. . . . 
   The middle-aged servant woman led me into the drawing-room 
where there was a duster on a chair and a broom leaning against 
the centre table. The motes danced in the sunshine; I regretted 
I had not written a letter instead of coming myself and was 
thankful for the brightness of the day. Miss Haldin in a plain 
.p188 
black dress came lightly out of her mother's room with a 
fixed uncertain smile on her lips. 
   I pulled the paper out of my pocket. I did not imagine 
that a number of the Standard could have the effect of Medusa's 
head. Her face went stony in a moment{ -- }her eyes{ -- }her limbs.
The most terrible thing was that being stony she remained alive. 
One was conscious of her palpitating heart. I hope she forgave 
me the delay of my clumsy circumlocution. It was not very 
prolonged; she could not have kept so still from head to foot 
for more than a second or two; and then I heard her draw a 
breath. As if the shock had paralysed her 
.p189 
moral resistance and affected the firmness of her muscles, the 
contours of her face seemed to have given way. She was 
frightfully altered. She looked old{ -- }ruined. But only for 
a moment. She said with decision: 
   {op"}I am going to tell my Mother at once." 
   {op"}Would that be safe in her state?" I objected. 
   {op"}What can be worse than the state she has been in for the 
last month? We understand this in another 
way. The crime is 
not at his door. Don't imagine I am defending him before you." 
.p190 
   She went to the bedroom door, then came back where I sat to ask me in a low murmur not to go yet. 
For twenty interminable minutes not a sound reached me. At last 
Miss Haldin came out and walked across the room with her quick 
light step. When she reached the armchair she dropped 
into it heavily as if completely exhausted. 
   Mrs Haldin, she told me, had not shed a tear. She was 
sitting up in bed, and her immobility her silence, were very alarming. 
.p191 
At last she laid down gently and had motioned 
her daughter away. 
   {op"}She will call me in presently," added Miss Haldin. {op"}I 
left a bell near the bed." 
   I confess that my very real sympathy had no standpoint. 
The Western readers for whom this story is written, will 
understand what I mean. It was, if I may say so, the want of 
experience. Death is a remorseless spoliator. The anguish of 
irreparable loss is familiar to us all. There is no life so 
lonely as to be safe against that experience. But the grief 
I had brought to these two ladies had gruesome associations. 
It had the associations of bombs and gallows{ -- }a lurid, Russian 
colouring which made the complexion of my sympathy uncertain. 
   I was grateful to Miss Haldin for not embarrassing me by 
an outward display of deep feeling. I admired her for that 
wonderful command over herself, even while I was a little 
frightened at it. It was the stillness of a great tension. 
.p192 
What if it should suddenly snap? Even the door of Mrs Haldin's 
room with the old Mother alone in there had a rather awful 
aspect. 
   Nathalie Haldin murmured sadly. 
   {op"}I suppose you are wondering what my feelings are?" 
   Essentially that was true. It was that very wonder which 
unsettled my sympathy of a dense occidental.  I could get hold 
of nothing but of some commonplace phrases, those futile phrases 
.p193 
that give the measure of our impotence before each other's 
trials. I mumbled something to the effect that, for the young, 
life held its hopes and compensations. It held duties too{ -- }but of that I was certain it was not necessary to remind her. 
   She had a handkerchief in her hands and pulled at it 
nervously. 
   {op"}I am not likely to forget my Mother," she said. {op"}We used 
to be three. Now we are two{ -- }two women. She's not so very 
old. She may live quite a long time yet. What have we to 
look for in the future? For what hope and what consolation?" 
   {op"}You must take a wider view," I said resolutely, thinking 
that with this exceptional creature this was the right note to 
strike. She looked at me steadily for a moment, and
then the tears she had been 
keeping down flowed unrestrained. She jumped up and stood in 
the window with her back to me. 
   I slipped away without attempting even to approach her. 
Next day I was told at the door that Mrs Haldin was better. The 
.p194 
middle-aged servant remarked that a lot of people{ -- }Russians{ -- }had called that day but Miss Haldin had not seen anybody. A 
fortnight later, when making my daily call I was asked in and 
found Mrs Haldin sitting in her usual place by the window. 
   At first one would have thought that nothing was changed. 
I saw across the room the familiar profile, a little sharper in 
outline and overspread by a uniform pallor as might have been 
expected in an invalid. But no disease could have accounted 
for the change in her black eyes, smiling no longer with gentle 
irony. She raised them as she gave me her hand. 
I observed the three week's old number of 
the Standard folded with the correspondence from Russia 
uppermost, lying on a little table by the side of 
the armchair. Mrs Haldin's voice 
was startlingly weak and colourless. Her first words to me 
framed a question. 
   {op"}Has there been anything more in your newspapers?" 
   I released her long emaciated hand, shook my head negatively 
and sat down. 
.p195 
   {op"}The English press is wonderful. Nothing can be kept secret 
from it, and all the world must hear. Only our Russian news 
is not always easy to understand. Not always easy. . . .  But 
English Mothers do not look for news like that. . . ." 
   She laid her hand on the newspaper and took it away again. 
I said: 
   {op"}We too have had tragic times in our history." 
   {op"}A long time ago. A very long time ago." 
   {op"}Yes." 
   {op"}There are nations that have made their bargain with fate," 
said Miss Haldin, who had approached us. {op"}We need not envy 
them." 
   {op"}Why this scorn?" I asked gently. {op"}It may be that our 
bargain was not a very lofty one. But the terms men and 
nations obtain from Fate are hallowed by the price." 
   Mrs Haldin turned her head away and looked out of the window 
for a time with that new, sombre, extinct gaze of her sunken 
eyes which so completely made another woman of her . . . {op"}That 
Englishman, this correspondent," she addressed me suddenly, {op"}do 
.p196 
you think it is possible that he knew my son?" 
   To this strange question I could ouly say that it was 
possible of course. She saw my surprise. 
   {op"}If one knew what sort of man he was one could perhaps 
write to him," she murmured. 
   {op"}Mother thinks," explained Miss Haldin standing between us, 
with one hand resting on the back of my chair, {op"}that, my poor 
brother, perhaps did not try to save himself." 
   I looked up at Miss Haldin in sympathetic consternation, 
but Miss Haldin was looking down calmly at her Mother. That 
last said: 
   {op"}We do not know the addresses of any of his friends. 
Indeed we know nothing of his Petersburg comrades. 
He had a multitude of young friends, only he 
never spoke much of them. One could guess that they were his 
disciples and that they idolised him. But he was so modest. 
One would think that with so many devoted . . ." 
   She averted her head again and looked down the Boulevard des 
.p197 
Philosophes, a singularly arid and dusty thoroughfare, where 
nothing could be seen at the moment but two dogs, a little girl 
in a pinafore hopping on one leg, and in the distance a workman 
wheeling a bicycle. 
   {op"}Even amongst the Apostles of Christ there was found a 
Judas," she whispered as if to herself, but with the evident 
intention to be heard by me. 
   The Russian visitors assembled in little knots conversed 
amongst themselves meantime, in low murmurs, and with brief glances 
in our direction. It was a great contrast to the usual loud 
volubility of these gatherings. Miss Haldin followed me into 
the anteroom. 
   {op"}People will come," she said. {op"}We cannot shut the door 
in their faces." 
   While I was putting on my overcoat she began to talk to me 
of her Mother. Poor Mrs Haldin was fretting after more news. 
She wanted to go on hearing about her unfortunate son. She 
could not make up her mind to abandon him quietly to the dumb 
unknown. She would persist in pursuing him in there through the 
.p198 
long days of motionless silence face to face with the empty 
Boulevard des Philosophes. She could not understand why he 
had not escaped{ -- }as so many other revolutionists and 
conspirators had managed to escape in other instances of that kind. It 
was really inconceivable that the means of secret revolutionary 
organizations should have failed so inexcusably to preserve her 
son. But in reality the inconceivable that staggered her mind 
was nothing but the cruel audacity of Death passing over her 
head to strike at that young and precious heart. 
   Miss Haldin mechanically, with an absorbed look, handed 
me my hat. I understood from her that the poor woman was 
possessed by the sombre and simple idea that her son must have 
perished because he did not want to be saved. It could not 
have been that he despaired of his country's future. That was 
impossible. Was it possible that his mother and sister had not 
known how to merit his confidence; and that, after having done 
what he was compelled to do, his spirit became crushed by an 
intolerable doubt, his mind distracted by a sudden mistrust. 
   I was very much shocked by this piece of ingenuity. 
.p199 
   {op"}Our three lives were like this!" Miss Haldin twined the 
fingers of both her hands together in demonstration then 
separated them slowly, looking straight into my 
face. {op"}That's what 
poor Mother found to torment herself and me with for all the 
years to come," added that strange girl. At that moment her 
indefinable charm was revealed to me in the conjunction of 
passion and stoicism. I imagined what her life was likely 
to be by the side of Mrs Haldin's terrible immobility, inhabited 
by that fixed idea. But my concern was reduced to silence by 
my ignorance of her modes of feeling. Difference of 
nationality is a terrible obstacle for our complex western natures. 
But Miss Haldin, probably was too simple to suspect 
embarrassment. She did not wait for me to say anything, but as if 
reading my thoughts on my face she went on courageously. 
   {op"}At first poor Mother went numb, as our peasants say; 
then she began to think and she will go on now thinking and 
thinking in that unfortunate strain. You see yourself how cruel 
that is. . . ." 
   I never spoke with greater sincerity than when I agreed 
.p200 
with her that it would be deplorable in the highest degree. 
She took an anxious breath. 
   {op"}{op"}But all these strange details in the English paper" she 
exclaimed suddenly. {op"}What is the meaning of them? I suppose 
they are true? But is it not terrible that he should be 
caught wandering alone, as if in despair, about the streets at 
night. . . ." 
   We stood so close to each other in the dark anteroom that 
I could see her biting her lower lip to suppress a dry sob. 
After a short pause she said: 
   {op"}I suggested to Mother that he may have been betrayed by 
some false friend or simply by some cowardly creature. It may 
be easier for her to believe that." 
   I understood now the poor woman's whispered allusion to 
Judas. 
   {op"}It may be easier," I admitted, admiring inwardly the 
directness and the subtlety of the girl's outlook. She was 
dealing with life as it was made for her by the political 
conditions of her country. She faced cruel realities not morbid 
.p201 
imaginings of her own making. I could not defend myself 
from a certain feeling of respect when she added simply: 
   {op"}Time they say can soften every sort of bitterness. But 
I can not believe that it has any power over remorse. It is 
better that Mother should think some person guilty of Viktor's 
death, than that she should connect it with a weakness of her 
son or a shortcoming of her own." 
   {op"}But you, yourself, don't suppose that. . . " I began. 
   She compressed her lips and shook her head. She 
harboured no evil thoughts against anyone, she declared{ -- }and 
perhaps, nothing that happened was unnecessary. On these words 
pronounced low and sounding mysterious in the half obscurity of 
the anteroom, we parted with an expressive and warm handshake. 
The grip of her strong, shapely hand had a seductive frankness, 
a sort of exquisite virility. I do not know why she should have 
felt so friendly to me. It may be that she thought I 
understood her much better than I was able to do. The most 
precise of her sayings seemed always to me to have enigmatical 
prolongations, vanishing somewhere beyond my reach. I am 
.p202 
reduced to suppose that she appreciated my attention and my 
silence. The attention she could see was quite sincere, so 
that the silence could not be suspected of coldness. It 
seemed to satisfy her. And it is to be noted that if she 
confided in me it was clearly not with the expectation of 
receiving advice for which indeed she never asked.
.p202 
{ti}Razumov. 
{pt}Part II 
{cn}II 
{cop}Our daily relations were interrupted at this period for 
something like a fortnight. I had to absent myself 
unexpectedly from Geneva. On my return I lost no time in directing my 
steps up the Boulevard des Philosophes. 
   Through the open door of the drawing-room I was annoyed to 
hear a visitor holding forth steadily in an unctuous deep voice. 
   Mrs Haldin's armchair by the window stood empty. On the 
sofa, Nathalie Haldin raised her charming grey eyes in a glance 
of greeting accompanied by the merest hint of a welcoming smile. 
But she made no movement. With her strong white hands lying 
inverted in the lap of her mourning dress she faced a man who 
presented to me a robust back covered with black broadcloth, and 
well in keeping with the deep voice. He turned his head sharply 
.p203 
over his shoulder but only for a moment. 
   {op"}Ah! your English friend. I know. I know. That's 
nothing." 
   He wore spectacles with smoked glasses; a tall silk hat 
stood on the floor by the side of his chair. Flourishing 
slightly a big soft hand he went on with his discourse 
precipitating his delivery a little more. 
   {op"}I have never changed the faith I held while wandering in 
the forests and bogs of Siberia. It sustained me then{ -- }it 
sustains me now. All the great Powers of Europe are bound to 
disappear{ -- }and the cause of their collapse will be very 
simple. They will exhaust themselves struggling against their 
proletariat. In Russia it is different. In Russia we have 
no classes to combat each other, one holding the power of wealth a
and the other mighty with the strength of numbers. We have 
only an unclean bureaucracy in the face of a people as great 
and as incorruptible as the ocean. No, we have no classes. 
But we have the Russian woman. The admirable Russian woman! 
I receive most remarkable letters signed by women. So elevated 
.p204 
in tone, so courageous, breathing such a noble ardour of 
service! The greatest part of our hopes rests on women. I 
behold their thirst for knowledge. It is admirable. Look how 
they absorb, how they are making it their own. It is miraculous. 
But what is knowledge?. . . .  I understand that you have not been 
studying anything especially{ -- }medicine for instance. No? 
That's right. Had I been honoured by being asked to advise 
you on the use of your time when you arrived here I would have 
been strongly opposed to such a course. Knowledge in itself 
is mere dross." 
   He had one of those vast bearded Russian faces without 
shape, a mere appearance of flesh and hair with not a single 
feature having any sort of character. His eyes being hidden 
by the dark glasses there was an utter absence of all expression. 
I knew him by sight. He was a Russian refugee of mark. All 
Geneva knew his burly black-coated figure. At one time all Europe 
was aware of the story of his life written by himself and 
translated into seven or more languages. He had led an idle, 
dissolute life. Then a society girl he was about to marry 
.p205 
died suddenly and thereupon he abandoned the world of fashion 
and began to conspire in a spirit of repentance, and, after that, his native 
autocracy took good care that the usual things should happen 
to him. He was imprisoned in fortresses, beaten within an inch 
of his life, and condemned to work in mines, with common 
criminals. The great success of his book however was the chain. 
   I do not remember now the details of the weight and length 
of the fetters rivetted on his limbs by an {op"}Administrative" 
order, but it was in the number of pounds and the thickness of 
links an appalling assertion of the divine right of autocracy. 
Appalling and futile too, because this big man managed to carry 
off that simple engine of government with him into the woods. 
The sensational clink of irons is heard all through the 
chapters describing his escape{ -- }a subject of wonder 
to two continents. He had begun by 
concealing himself successfully from his guards in a hole on a 
river bank. It was the end of day; with infinite labour he 
.p206 
managed to free one of his legs. Meantime night fell. He was 
going to begin on his other leg when he was overtaken by a 
terrible misfortune. He dropped his file. 
   All this is precise yet symbolic; and the file had its 
pathetic history. It was given to him unexpectedly one 
evening, by a quiet pale-faced girl. The poor creature had come 
out to the mines to join one of his fellow convicts, a delicate 
young man, a mechanic and a social democrat, with broad 
cheekbones and large staring eyes. She had worked her way 
across half Russia and nearly the whole of Siberia to be near 
him, and, as it seems, with the hope of helping him to escape. 
But she arrived too late. Her lover had died only a week 
before. 
   Through that obscure episode, as he says, in the history 
of Ideas in Russia, the file came into his hands, and its 
possession inspired him with an ardent resolution to regain his 
liberty. When it slipped through his fingers it was as if it 
had gone straight into the earth. 
.p207 
He could by no manner of means put his hand on it again 
in the dark. He groped 
systematically in the loose earth, in the mud, in the water; the night 
was passing meantime, the precious night on which he counted to 
get away into the forests, his only chance of success. For a 
moment he was tempted by despair to give up; but recalling the 
quiet, sad face of the heroic girl, he felt profoundly ashamed 
of his weakness. She had selected him for the gift of liberty 
and he must show himself worthy of the favour conferred by her 
feminine, indomitable soul. It appeared to be a sacred trust. 
To fail would have been a sort of treason against the sacredness 
of self-sacrifice and womanly love. 
   There are in his book whole pages of self-analysis whence 
emerges like a white figure from a dark confused sea the 
conviction of woman's spiritual superiority{ -- }his new faith 
confessed since in several volumes. His first tribute to it, the 
great act of his conversion, was his extraordinary existence in 
the endless forests of the Okhotsk Province, with the loose end 
of the chain wound about his waist. 
.p208 
A strip torn off his convict shirt secured the end firmly. 
Other strips fastened it at intervals up his left leg to 
deaden the clanking and to prevent the slack links from getting 
hooked in the bushes. He became very fierce. He developed an 
unsuspected genius for the arts of a wild and hunted existence. 
He learned to creep into villages without betraying his presence 
by anything more than an occasional faint jingle. He broke 
into outhouses with an axe he managed to purloin in a wood-
cutters' camp very early in the story. In the deserted tracts 
of country he lived on wild berries and hunted for honey. His 
clothing dropped off him gradually. His naked tawny figure 
glimpsed vaguely through the bushes with a cloud of mosquitos 
and flies hovering about the shaggy head spread tales of {op'}terror 
through whole districts. His temper grew savage as the days 
went by and he was glad to discover that there was so much of 
a brute in him. He had nothing else to put his trust in. For 
it was as though there had been two human beings indissolubly 
joined in that enterprise. The civilised man, the enthusiast 
.p209 
of advanced humanitarian ideals thirsting for the triumph of 
spiritual love and political liberty; and the stealthy primeval 
savage, pitilessly cunning in the preservation of his freedom 
from day to day, like a tracked wild beast. 
   The wild beast was making its way instinctively eastward 
to the Pacific coast, and the civilised humanitarian followed in 
fearful anxious dependence watching the proceedings with awe. 
Through all these weeks he could never make up his mind to 
appeal to human compassion. In the wary primeval savage this 
shyness might have been natural, but the other too, the civilised 
creature, the thinker, the escaping {op'}political' had developed 
an absurd form of morbid pessimism, a form of temporary insanity,
originating perhaps in the physical worry and discomfort 
of the chain. These links, he fancied, made him odious to the 
rest of mankind. It was a repugnant and suggestive load. 
Nobody could feel any pity at the disgusting sight of a man 
secaping with a broken chain. His imagination became affected 
by his fetters in a precise, matter-of-fact manner. It seemed 
to him impossible that people could resist the temptation of 
.p210 
fastening the loose end to a staple in the wall while they went 
for the nearest police official. Crouching in holes or hidden 
in thickets he had tried to read the faces of unsuspecting 
peasants working in the clearings or passing along the paths 
within a foot or two of his eyes. His feeling was that no 
man on earth could be trusted with the temptation of the chain. 
   One day however he chanced to come upon a solitary woman. 
It was on an open slope of rough grass outside the forest. She 
sat on the bank of a narrow stream; she had a red handkerchief 
on her head and a small basket was lying on the ground near her 
hand. At a little distance could be seen a cluster of log 
cabins, with a water-mill over a dammed pool shaded by birch trees 
and looking bright as glass in the twilight. He approached her 
silently, his hatchet sticking in his iron belt, a thick cudgel 
in his hand: there were leaves, and bits of twigs in his tangled 
hair, in his matted beard; bunches of rags he had wound round 
the links fluttered from his waist. A faint clink of his fetters 
made the woman turn her head. Too terrified by this savage 
apparition to jump up or even to scream, she was yet too stout-hearted 
.p211 
to faint . . .  Expecting nothing less than to be murdered on the 
spot she covered her eyes to avoid the sight of the descending 
axe. When at last she found courage to look again, she saw 
him sitting on the bank six feet away from her. His thin sinewy 
arms hugged his naked legs; the long beard covered the knees on 
which he rested his chin; all these clasped folded limbs, the 
bare shoulders, the wild head with red staring eyes, shook and 
trembled violently while the bestial creature was making efforts 
to speak. It was six weeks since he had heard the sound of his 
own voice. It seemed as though he had lost the faculty of 
speech. He had become a dumb and despairing brute, till the 
woman's sudden, unexpected cry of profound pity, the insight of 
her feminine compassion discovering the complex misery of the 
man under the terrifying aspect of the monster, restored him to 
the ranks of humanity. This point of view is presented in his 
book, with a very effective eloquence. She ended, he says, by 
shedding tears over him, sacred, redeeming tears, while he 
also wept with joy in the manner of a converted sinner. 
Directing him to hide in the bushes and wait patiently (a police 
.p212 
patrol was expected in the Settlement) she went away towards 
the houses, promising to return at night. 
   As if providentially appointed to be the newly-wedded wife 
of the village blacksmith, the woman persuaded her husband to 
come out with her, bringing some tools of his trade, a hammer, 
a chisel, a small anvil. . . .  {op"}My fetters"{ -- }the book says{ -- }{op"}were 
struck off on the banks of the stream, in the starlight of a 
calm night by an athletic, taciturn young man of the people, 
kneeling at my feet, while the woman like a liberating genius 
stood by with clasped hands." Obviously a symbolic couple. 
At the same time they furnished his regained humanity with 
some decent clothing, and put heart into the new man by the 
information that the sea-coast of the Pacific was only a very few 
miles away. It could be seen in fact from the top of the next 
ridge. . . . 
   The rest of his escape does not lend itself to mystic 
treatment and symbolic interpretation. He ended by finding 
his way to the West by the Suez Canal route in the usual manner. 
Reaching the shores of South Europe he sat down to write his 
.p213 
autobiography{ -- }the great literary success of its year. This 
book was followed by other books written with the declared purpose 
of elevating humanity. In these works he preached generally 
the cult of the woman. For his own part he practised it under 
the rites of special devotion to the transcendental merits of a 
certain Madame de S{---}a lady of advanced views, no longer very 
young, once upon a time the intriguing wife of a now dead and 
forgotten diplomat. Her loud pretensions to be one of the 
leaders of modern thought and of modern sentiment she sheltered 
(like Voltaire and Mme de Stael) on the republican territory of 
Geneva. Driving through the streets in her big landau she 
exhibited to the indifference of the natives and the stares of the 
tourists a long-waisted youthful figure of hieratic stiffness, wit 
with a pair of big gleaming eyes, rolling restlessly behind a 
short veil of black lace which coming down no further than her 
vividly red lips resembled a mask. Usually the {op"}heroic fugitive" 
(this description is applied to him in a review of the English 
edition of his book) the {op"}heroic fugitive" accompanied her, 
sitting, portentously bearded and darkly bespectacled, not by 
.p214 
her side but opposite her, with his back to the horses. Thus 
facing each other, with no one else in the roomy carriage, their 
airings suggested a conscious public manifestation. Or it may 
have been unconscious. Russian simplicity often marches 
innocently on the edge of cynicism for some lofty purpose. But 
it is a vain enterprise for the sophisticated Europe to try and 
understand these doings. Considering the air of gravity 
extending even to the physiognomy of the coachman and the action 
of the showy horses, this quaint display might have possessed 
a mystic significance, but to the corrupt frivolity of a Western 
mind, like my own, it seemed hardly decent. 
   However it is not becoming for an obscure teacher of 
languages to criticise a {op"}heroic fugitive" of world-wide 
celebrity. I was aware from hearsay that he was an industrious 
busy-body, hunting up his compatriots in hotels, in private 
lodgings, and{ -- }I was told{ -- }conferring upon them the honour of 
his notice in public gardens when a suitable opening presented 
itself. I was under the impression that after a visit or two, 
several months before, he had given up the ladies Haldin{ -- }no 
.p215 
doubt reluctantly for there could be no question of his being 
a determined person. It was perhaps to be expected that he 
should re-appear again on this terrible occasion, as a Russian 
and a revolutionist, to say the right thing, to strike the 
true, perhaps a comforting note. But I did not like to see him 
sitting there. I trust that an unbecoming jealousy of my 
privileged position had nothing to do with it. I made no claim 
to a special standing for my silent friendship. Removed by 
the difference of age and nationality, as if into the sphere of 
another existence, I produced even upon myself the effect of a 
dumb helpless ghost, of an anxious immaterial thing that could 
only hover about without the power to protect or guide by as 
much as a whisper. Since Miss Haldin, with her sure instinct 
had refrained from introducing me to the burly celebrity I would 
have retired quietly and returned later on, had I not met a 
peculiar expression in her eyes which I interpreted as a request 
to stay, with the view, perhaps, of shortening an unwelcome 
visit. 
   He picked up his hat but only to deposit it 
on his knees. 
.p227 
   {op"}We shall meet again, Natalia Viktorovna. To-
day I have called only to mark those feelings towards your 
honoured Mother and yourself, the nature of which you cannot 
doubt. I needed no urging but Eleanor { -- }Mme de S{ -- }herself had in a way 
sent me. She extends to you the hand of feminine fellowship. 
There is positively in all the range of human sentiments no joy 
and no sorrow that woman cannot understand, elevate and 
spiritualize by her interpretation. That young man newly arrived from St. 
Petersburg, I have mentioned to you, is already under the charm." 
   At this point Miss Haldin got up abruptly. I was glad. 
He did not evidently expect anything so decisive and, at first, 
throwing his head back he tilted up his dark glasses with an air 
.p228 
of bland curiosity. At last, recollecting himself he stood up 
hastily seizing his hat, as he did so, off his knees with great 
adroitness. 
   {op"}How is it, Natalia Viktorovna, that you have kept aloof 
so long, from what after all is{ -- }let disparaging tongues say 
what they like{ -- }a unique centre of intellectual freedom and of 
effort towards giving body to a high conception of our future? 
In the case of your honoured Mother I understand in a measure. 
At her age new ideas{ -- }new faces are not perhaps. . . .  But you! 
Was it mistrust{ -- }or diffidence? You must come out of your 
reserve. We Russians have no right to be reserved with each 
other. In our circumstances it is almost a crime against 
humanity. The luxury of private grief is not for us. Nowadays 
the devil is not combated by prayers and fasting. And what is 
fasting after all but starvation. You must not starve yourself, 
Natalia Viktorovna. Strength is what we want. Spiritual 
.p229 
Strength I mean to say. As to the other kind, what could 
withstand us Russians if we only put it forth? Sin is different in our 
day and the way of salvation for pure souls is different too. It 
is no longer to be found in monasteries but in the world, in the . . ." 
   The deep sound seemed to come from 
under the floor, and one felt steeped in it to the lips. Miss 
Haldin's interruption resembled the effort of a drowning person 
to keep above water. She struck in with an accent of 
impatience. 
   {op"}But, Peter Ivanovitch, I don't mean to retire into a 
monastery. Who would look for salvation there?" 
   {op"}I spoke figuratively," he boomed. 
   {op"}Well then, I am speaking figuratively too. But sorrow 
is sorrow and pain is pain in the old way. They make their 
demands upon people. One has got to face them the best way one 
can. I know that the blow which has fallen upon us so 
unexpectedly is only an episode in the fate of a people. You may 
rest assured that I don't forget that. But just now I have to think of 
my Mother. How can you expect me to leave her to herself. . . . " 
.p230 
   {op"}That is putting it in a very crude way," he protested in 
his great effortless voice. 
Miss Haldin did not wait for the vibration to die out. 
   {op"}And run about visiting amongst a lot of strange people. 
The idea is distasteful for me; and I do not know what else you 
may mean?" 
   He towered before her, enormous, deferential 
cropped as close as a convict; and this big pinkish poll 
evoked for me the vision of a wild head with matted locks 
peering through parted bushes, glimpses of tawny limbs, slinking 
behind the masses of sodden foliage under a cloud of flies and 
mosquitos. It was an involuntary tribute to the vigour of his 
writing. Nobody could doubt that he had wandered in Siberian 
forests, naked and girt with a chain. The black broadcloth 
coat invested his person with a character of common and austere 
decency{ -- }something recalling a missionary. 
   {op"}Do you know what I want, Natalia Viktorovna?" he uttered 
solemnly. {op"}I want you to be a fanatic." 
   {op"}A fanatic!" 
.p231 
   {op"}Yes! Faith alone won't do." 
   His voice dropped to a still lower tone. He raised for 
a moment one thick arm; the other remained hanging down against 
his thigh, with the fragile silk hat at the end. 
   {---}{op"}I shall tell you now something which I entreat you to ponder 
over carefully. Listen: we need a force that would move 
heaven and earth{ -- }nothing less." 
   The profound, subterranean note of this {op"}nothing less" 
made one shudder, almost, like the deep muttering of wind in the 
pipes of an organ. 
   {op"}And are we to find that force in the salon of Madame de 
S{---}? Excuse me Peter Ivanovitch if I permit myself to doubt it. 
Is not that lady a woman of the great world, an aristocrat!" 
   {op"}Prejudice!" he cried. {op"}You astonish me. And suppose 
she was all that! She is also a woman of flesh and blood. 
There is always something to weigh down the spiritual side, in 
all of us. But to make of it a reproach is what I did not 
expect from you. No! I did not expect that. One would think 
.p232 
you have listened to some malevolent scandal." 
   {op"}I have heard no gossip. I assure you. In our province 
how could we? But the world speaks of her. What can there 
be in common in a lady of that sort and an obscure country 
girl like me?" 
   {op"}She is a perpetual manifestation of a noble and peerless 
spirit," he broke in. Her charm{ -- }no, I shall 
not speak of her charm. But of course everybody who approaches 
her falls under the spell. . . .  Contradictions vanish, trouble 
falls away from one. . . .  Unless I am mistaken{ -- }but I never 
make a mistake in spiritual matters{ -- }you are troubled in your 
soul, Natalia Viktorovna." 
   Miss Haldin's clear eyes looked straight at his soft 
enormous face; I received the impression that behind these dark 
spectacles of his he could be as impudent as he chose. 
.p233 
   {op"}Only the other evening walking back to town from Chateau 
Borel with our latest interesting arrival from Petersburg I 
could notice the powerful soothing influence{ -- }I may say 
reconciling influence. . . .  There he was, all these kilometres along th 
the shores of the lake, silent, like a man who has 
been shown the way of peace. I 
could feel the leaven working in his soul{ -- }you understand. 
For one thing he listened to me patiently. I myself was 
inspired that evening by the firm and exquisite genius of Eleanor{ -- }
Mme de S{---} you know. It was a full moon and I could observe 
his face. I cannot be deceived. . ." 
   Miss Haldin was looking down, seemed to hesitate. 
   {op"}Well! I will think of what you said, Peter 
Ivanovitch. I shall try to call as soon as I can leave mother 
for an hour or two safely." 
   Coldly as these words were said I was amazed at such a 
concession. He snatched her right hand with such fervour that 
I thought he was going to press it to his lips or his breast. 
But he only held it by the finger-tips in his great paw and 
shook it a little up and down while he delivered his last 
.p234 
volley of words. 
   {op"}That's right. That's right! I haven't obtained your 
full confidence as yet, Natalia Viktorovna but that will come. 
All in good time. The sister of Viktor Haldin cannot be without 
importance. . . .  It's simply impossible. And no woman can 
remain sitting on the steps. Flowers, tears, applause{ -- }that has 
had its time; it's a mediaeval conception. The arena, the 
arena itself is the place for women!" 
   He relinquished her hand with a short flourish, as if 
giving it to her for a gift and remained still, his head bowed 
in dignified submission before her femininity. 
   {op"}The arena! . . .  You must descend into the arena, Natalia." 
   He stepped back a pace, bowed his enormous body
and was gone swiftly. The door fell 
behind him. But immediately the powerful 
resonance of his voice was heard addressing in the anteroom
the middle-aged servant woman who was letting him out. Whether 
he exhorted her to descend into the arena I can not tell. The 
thing sounded like a lecture, and the slight crash of the outer door cut it short suddenly.  
end of Chap II
p II
.p235 
.p235 
{ti}Razumov. 
{pt}Part II 
{ch}III 
{cop}We remained looking at each other for a time. 
   {op"}Do you know who he is?" 
   Miss Haldin, coming forward, put this question to me in 
English. 
   I took her offered hand. {op"}Everybody knows. He is a 
revolutionary feminist, a great writer if you like and{ -- }how 
shall I say it{ -- }the{ -- }the familiar guest of Madame de S{---}'s 
mystic revolutionary salon." 
.p236 
.p237 
   Miss Haldin passed her hand over her forehead. {op"}You know he was 
with me for more than an hour before you came in. I was so 
glad Mother was lying down. She has many nights without sleep 
and then sometimes in the middle of the day she gets a rest of 
several hours. It is sheer exhaustion{ -- }but still, I am 
thankful. . . .  If it were not for these intervals. . . " 
   She looked at me and, with that extraordinary penetration 
which used to disconcert me, shook her head. 
   {op"}No. She would not go mad." 
   {op"}My dear young lady" I cried by way of protest, the more 
shocked because in my heart I was far from thinking Mrs Haldin 
quite sane. 
   {op"}You don't know what a fine, clear intellect Mother had" 
continued Natalie Haldin, with her calm clear-eyed simplicity 
.p238 
which seemed to me always to have a quality of heroism. 
   {op"}I am sure. . . ." I murmured. 
   {op"}I darkened mother's room and came out here. I've wanted 
for so long to think quietly." 
   She paused, then without giving any sign of distress added: 
{op"}It is so difficult," and looked at me with a strange fixity, 
as if watching for a sign of dissent or surprise. 
   I gave neither. I was irresistibly impelled to say: 
   {op"}The visit from that gentleman has not made it any easier, 
I fear." 
.p256 
   Miss Haldin stood before me with a peculiar 
expression in her eyes. 
   {op"}I don't pretend to understand Peter Ivanovitch completely. 
Some guide one must have, even if one does not wholly give up 
the direction of one's conduct to him. I am an inexperienced 
girl but I am not slavish. There has been too much of that in 
Russia. Why should I not listen to him? There is no harm in 
having one's thoughts directed. But I don't mind confessing 
to you that I have not been completely candid with Peter 
Ivanovitch. I don't quite know what prevented me at the moment . . ." 
   She walked away suddenly from me to a distant part of the room; but 
it was only to open and shut a drawer in a bureau. She 
approached me again with a piece of paper in her hand. It was 
.p257 
thin and blackened with close handwriting. It was obviously a 
letter. 
   {op"}I wanted to read you the very words," she said. {op"}This is 
one of my poor brother's letters. He never doubted. How 
could he doubt? They are only such a small handful these 
miserable oppressors before the unanimous will of our people." 
   {op"}Your brother believed in the power of a people's will to 
achieve anything?" 
   {op"}It was his religion," declared Miss Haldin. 
I looked at her calm face and her animated eyes. 
{op"}Of course the will must be awakened, inspired, concentrated. 
That is the true task of real agitators. One has got to give up 
one's life to it. The degradation of servitude, the absolutist 
lies must be uprooted and swept out. Reform is impossible. 
There is nothing to reform. There is no legality, there are no 
institutions. There are only arbitrary decrees. There is only a handful of 
cruel{ -- }perhaps blind officials{ -- }against a nation." 
   The letter rustled slightly in her hand. I glanced down 
at the thin flimsy blackened pages whose very handwriting seemed 
.p258 
cabalistic, incomprehensible to the experience of Western 
Europe. 
   {op"}Stated like this" I confessed, {op"}the problem seems simple 
enough. But I fear I shall not see it solved. And if you 
go back to Russia I know that I shall not see you again. Yet once more I 
say: go back. Don't suppose that I am thinking of your 
preservation. No! I know that you will not be returning to 
personal safety. But I had much rather think of you in danger 
there than see you exposed to what may be met here." 
   {op"}I tell you what." said Miss Haldin after a moment of 
reflection. {op"}I believe that you hate revolution; you fancy it's 
not quite honest. You belong to a people which has made a 
bargain with fate and wouldn't like to be rude to it. But we have 
made no bargains. It was never offered to us{ -- }so much liberty 
for so much hard cash. You shrink from the idea of revolutionary 
action for those you think well of as if it were something{ -- }how 
shall I say it{ -- }not quite decent." 
   I bowed my head. 
   {op"}You are quite right," I said. {op"}I think very higly of 
.p259 
you." 
   {op"}Don't suppose I do not know it," she began hurriedly. 
{op"}Your friendship has been very valuable." 
   {op"}I have done little else but look on." 
   She was a little flushed under the eyes. 
   {op"}There is a way of looking on which is valuable. I have 
felt less lonely because of it. It's difficult to explain." 
   {op"}Really? Well, I too have felt less lonely. That's 
easy to explain though. But it won't go on much longer. The last 
thing I want to tell you is this: in a real revolution not a 
simple dynastic change or a mere reform of institutions{ -- }in a 
real revolution the best characters do not come to the 
front. A violent revolution falls into the hands of 
narrow-minded fanatics and of tyrannical hypocrites at first. Afterwards 
comes the turn of all the pretentious intellectual failures of 
the time. Such are the chiefs and the leaders. You will notice 
that I have left out the mere rogues. The scrupulous and the 
just, the noble, humane and devoted natures; the unselfish and 
the intelligent may begin a movement{ -- }but it passes away from 
.p260 
them. They are not the leaders of a revolution. They are its 
victims{ -- }the victims of disgust, of disenchantment{ -- }often of 
remorse. Hopes grotesquely betrayed, ideals caricatured{ -- }that 
is the definition of revolutionary success. There have been in 
every revolution hearts broken by such successes. But enough 
of that. My meaning is that I don't want you to be a victim." 
   {op"}If I could believe all you have said I still wouldn't think 
of myself" protested Miss Haldin. {op"}I would take liberty from 
any hand as a hungry man would snatch at a piece of bread. The 
true progress must begin after. And for that the right men shall 
be found. They are already amongst us. 
One comes upon them in their obscurity, unknown, preparing 
themselves . . ." 
   She spread out the letter she had kept in her hand all the 
time and looking down at it: 
   {op"}Yes! one comes upon such men!" she repeated, and then read out the words: 
{op'}Unstained, lofty and solitary existences.' 
   Folding up the letter while I looked at her interrogatively 
she explained: 
.p261 
   {op"}These are the words which my brother applies to 
a young man he came to know in St. Petersburg. An 
intimate friend I suppose. It must be. His is the only name my 
brother mentions in all his correspondence with me. Absolutely 
the only one, and{ -- }would you believe it?{ -- }the man is here. He 
arrived recently in Geneva." 
   {op"}Have you seen him?" I inquired. {op"}But of course you must 
have seen him." 
   {op"}No! No! I haven't. I didn't know he was here. It's 
Peter Ivanovitch himself who told me. You have heard him 
yourself, mentioning a new arrival from Petersburg. . .  Well, that is the man 
of {op"}unstained, loaty and solitary existence". My brother's 
friend!" 
   {op"}Compromised politically, I suppose," I remarked. 
   {op"}I don't know. Yes. It must be so. Who knows! Perhaps 
it was this very friendship with my brother which. . . .  But no! It 
is scarcely possible. Really I know nothing except what Peter 
Ivanovitch told me of him. He has brought a letter of introduction 
from Father Zosim{ -- }you know, the priest-democrat; you have heard 
of Father Zosim?" 
.p262 
   {op"}Oh yes. The famous Father Zosim has been staying here in 
Geneva for some two months about a year ago," I said. {op"}When he 
left here he seems to have disappeared from the world." 
   {op"}It appears that he is at work in Russia again. Somewhere 
in the centre," Miss Haldin said with animation. {op"}But please 
don't mention that to anyone{ -- }don't let it slip from you, 
because if it got into the papers it would be dangerous for him." 
   {op"}You are anxious of course to meet that friend of your brother?" I asked. 
   Miss Haldin put the letter into her pocket. Her eyes looked 
beyond my shoulder at the door of her mother's room. 
   {op"}Not here," she murmured. {op"}Not for the first time at least." 
   After a moment of silence I said good-bye, but Miss Haldin 
followed me into the anteroom. closing the door behind us carefully. 
   {op"}I suppose you guess where I mean to go to to-morrow." 
   {op"}You have made up your mind to call on Mme de S{---}." 
   {op"}Yes. I am going to the Chateau Borel. I must." 
   {op"}What do you expect to hear there?" I asked in a low vioce. 
I wondered if she were not deluding herself with some impossible 
hope. It was not that however. 
.p263 
   {op"}Only think{ -- }such a friend. The only man mentioned in his 
letters. He would have something to give me, if nothing more than a few poor 
words. It may be something said and thought in these last days. 
Would you want me to turn my back on what is left of my poor 
brother? A friend." 
   {op"}Certainly not," I said. {op"}I quite understand your pious 
curiosity." 
   {op"}{ -- }Unstained, lofty and solitary existences" she murmured 
to herself. {op"}There are! There are! Well, let me question one 
of them about the loved dead." 
   {op"}How do you know, though, that you will meet him there? Is he 
staying in the Chateau as a guest{ -- }do you suppose?" 
   {op"}I can't really tell," she confessed. {op"}He brought a 
written introduction from Father Zosim{ -- }who it seems is a friend of Mrs 
de S{---} too. She can't be such a worthless woman after all." 
   {op"}There were all sorts of rumours afloat about Father Zosim 
himself," I observed. 
   She shrugged her shoulders. 
   {op"}Calumny is a weapon of our government too. It's well 
.p264 
known. Oh yes! It is a fact that Father Zosim had the 
protection of the Governor General of a certain province. We talked 
on the subject with my brother two years ago, I remember. But 
his work was good. And now he is proscribed. What better 
proof can one require. But no matter what that priest was or is. 
All that cannot affect my brother's friend. If I don't meet him 
there I shall ask these people for his address. And of course 
mother must see him too, later on. There is no guessing what he 
may have to tell us. It would be a mercy if maman could be 
soothed. You know what she imagines. Some explanation perhaps 
may be found, or{ -- }or even made up perhaps. It would be no sin." 
   {op"}Certainly," I said. {op"}It would be no sin. It may be a 
mistake though." 
   {op"}I want her only to recover some of her old spirit. While 
she is like this I cannot think of anything calmly." 
   {op"}Do you mean to invent some sort of pious fraud at your 
mother's intention?" I asked. 
   {op"}Why fraud? Such a friend is sure to know something of my 
brother in these last days. He could tell us. . . 
.p265 
There is something in the facts which will not let me 
rest. I am certain he meant to join us abroad{ -- }that he had some 
plans{ -- }some great. patriotic action in view; not only for 
himself but for both of us. I trusted in that. I looked forward 
to the time. Oh! with such hope and impatience. . . I could have 
helped. And now suddenly this appearance of recklessness{ -- }as if 
he had not cared. . . ." 
   She remained silent for a time, then obstinately she 
concluded: 
   {op"}I want to know. . . ." 
.p266 
   Thinking it over, later on, while I walked slowly away from 
the Boulevard des Philosophes, I asked myself critically what 
precisely was it that she wanted to know? 
What I knew of her history was enough to give me a clue. In the 
educational establishment for girls where Miss Haldin finished 
her studies she was looked upon rather unfavourably. She was 
suspected of holding independent views on matters settled by 
official teaching. Afterwards when the two ladies returned to 
their country place both mother and daughter by speaking their 
minds openly on local events had earned for themselves a reputation
of liberalism. The three-horse trap of the district police-captain began to be seen frequently in their village,{ -- }{op"}I must 
keep an eye on the peasants"{ -- }so he explained his visits up at the house. {op"}Two 
lonely ladies must be looked after a little" . . .  He 
would inspect the walls as though he wanted to pierce them with 
.p267 
his eyes, peer at the photographs, turn over the books in the 
drawing-room negligently, and after accepting the usual 
refreshments, would depart. But the old priest of the village came one 
evening in the greatest distress and agitation to confess that he{ -- }
the priest{ -- }had been ordered to watch and ascertain in other 
ways too (such as using his spiritual power with the servants) all 
that was going on in the house and especially in respect of the 
visitors these ladies received, who they were, the length of their 
stay, whether any of them were strangers to that part of the 
country, and so on. The poor simple old man was in an agony of 
humiliation and terror. {op"}I came to warn you. Be cautious in your 
conduct for the love of God. I am burning with shame but there is no getting 
out from under the net. I shall have to tell them what I see, because 
if I did not there is my deacon. He would make the worst of things 
to curry favour. And then my son-in-law, the husband of my 
Parasha, who is a writer in the Government-Domain office; they would 
soon kick him out{ -- }and may be send him away somewhere." The 
old man lamented the necessities of the times{ -- }{op"}when people do 
not agree somehow" and wiped his eyes. He did not wish to spend 
.p268 
the evening of his days with a shaven head in the penitent's 
cell of some monastery{ -- }{op"}and subjected to all the severities of 
ecclesiastical discipline; for they would show no mercy to an 
old man," he groaned. He became almost hysterical and the two 
ladies full of commiseration soothed him the best they could 
before they let him go back to his cottage. But as a 
matter of fact they had very few visitors. The neighbours{ -- }
some of them old friends{ -- }began to keep away; a few from 
timidity, others with marked disdain, being grand people that came 
only for the summer. Miss Haldin explained to me: aristocrats, 
reactionaries. It was a solitary existence for a young girl. 
Her relations with her mother were of the tenderest and most 
open kind; but Mrs Haldin had seen the experiences of her own 
generation, its sufferings, its deceptions, its apostacies too. 
Her affection for her children was expressed by the suppression 
of all signs of anxiety. She maintained a heroic reserve. 
To Nathalie Haldin her brother, with his Petersburg existence, 
not enigmatical in the least (there could be no doubt of what he 
felt or thought) but conducted a little mysteriously, was the 
.p269 
only visible representative of a proscribed liberty. All the 
significance of freedom, its indefinite promises lived 
in their long discussions, breathing 
the loftiest hope of action and faith in success. Then, 
suidenly, the action, the hopes, came to an end with the details 
ferreted out by the English journalist. The concrete fact, the fact 
of his death remained; but it remained obscure in its deeper 
causes. She felt herself abandoned without explanation. But 
she did not suspect him. What she wanted was to learn almost at 
any cost how she could remain faithful to his departed spirit. 
.p287 
{cn}IV 
   Several days elapsed before I met Natalia Haldin again. I was crossing the place 
in front of the theatre when I made out her shapely figure in the 
very act of turning between the gate pillars of the unattractive 
public promenade of the Bastions. She walked away from me, but 
I knew we should meet as 
she returned down the main alley{ -- }unless indeed she were going 
home. In that case, I don't think I should have called 
on her yet. My desire to keep her away from these people was a strong 
as ever, but I had no illusions as to my power. I was but a 
Westerner, and it was clear that Miss Haldin would not, 
could not listen to my wisdom; and as to my desire of listening to 
her voice it were better, I thought, not to indulge 
over much in that pleasure. No, I would not have gone 
.p288 
to the Boulevard des Philosophes; but when at about the middle of 
the principal alley I saw Miss Haldin coming towards me I felt I 
was too curious, and too honest perhaps, to run away. 
   There was something of the spring harshness in the air. 
The blue sky was hard, but the young leaves clung like soft mist 
about the uninteresting range of trees; and the clear sun put 
little points of gold into the grey of Miss Haldin's 
.p289 
frank eyes turned to me with a friendly greeting. 
   I inquired after the health of her mother. 
   She had a slight movement of the shoulders and a little sigh. 
   {op"}But, you see, I did come out for a walk . . . for exercise 
as you English say." 
   I smiled approvingly and she added an unexpected remark 
{op"}It is a glorious day." 
   Her voice slightly harsh but fascinating with its masculine 
and bird-like quality had the accent of spontaneous conviction. I 
was glad of it. It was as though she had become aware of her 
youth{ -- }for there was nothing of spring-like glory in the 
rectangular railed space of grass and trees framed visibly by the orderly 
roofslopes of that town comely without grace and hospitable without 
sympathy. In the very air through which she moved there was but 
little warmth; and the sky, the sky of a land without horizons, 
swept and washed clean by the April showers, extended a cold 
cruel blue, without elevation, narrowed suddenly by the ugly, 
dark wall of the Jura where here and there lingered yet a few 
miserable trails and patches of snow. All the glory of the season 
must have been within herself{ -- }and I was glad this feeling had 
come into her life if only for a little time. 
   {op"}I am pleased to hear you say these words." 
   She gave me a quick look. Quick not stealthy. If there was 
one thing of which she was absolutely incapable it was stealthiness 
.p290 
of appearance or intention. Her sincerity was 
expressed in the very rhythm of her walk as she moved by my side. It 
was I who was looking at her covertly{ -- }if I may say so. I knew 
where she had been but I did not know what she had seen and heard 
in that nest of aristocratic conspiracies. I use the word 
aristocratic for want of a better term. The Chateau Borel embowered in 
the trees and thickets of its neglected grounds (they looked so 
through the spaces of iron railings interrupting the continuity of 
the enclosing wall) the Chateau Borel was in our day like the 
residence of that other dangerous and exiled woman Mme. de Stael 
in the Napoleonic era. Only the Napoleonic despotism, the booted and spurred heir of the 
Revolution, which counted that intellectual woman for an enemy 
worthy to be watched, was something quite unlike the autocracy in 
mystic vestments, engendered by the slavery of a Tartar conquest. 
And Mme. de S{---} was very far from resembling the gifted author of 
Corinne. She made a great noise about being persecuted. I don't 
know if she were regarded in certain circles, as dangerous. As to 
being watched I imagine that the Chateau Borel could be subjected 
only to a most distant observation. It was in its exclusiveness 
an ideal abode for hatching superior plots{ -- }whether serious or 
futile. But all this did not interest me. I wanted to know the 
effect its extraordinary inhabitants and its special atmosphere 
had produced on a girl like Miss Haldin, so true, so honest, but so 
dangerously inexperienced! Her unconsciously lofty ignorance of 
.p291 
the baser instincts of mankind left her disarmed before her own 
impulses. And there was also that friend of her brother the 
significant new arrival from Russia . . .  I wondered whether she had 
attained her end in meeting him. 
   We walked for some time slowly and in silence. 
   {op"}You know" I attacked her suddenly {op"}If you don't intend 
telling me anything you must say so distinctly and then of course it 
will be final. But I won't play at delicacy. I ask you point 
blank for all the details." 
   She smiled faintly at my threatening tone. 
   {op"}You are as curious as a child." 
   {op"}No. I am only an anxious old man," I replied earnestly. 
   She rested her glance on me as if to ascertain the degree of 
my anxiety or the number of my years. My physiognomy has never 
been expressive I believe, and as to my years I am not ancient 
enough as yet to be strikingly decrepid. I have no long beard like 
the good hermit of a romantic ballad. My footsteps are not 
tottering, my aspect not that of a slow, venerable sage. Those 
picturesque advantages are not mine. I am old, alas, in a brisk, 
commonplace way. And it seemed to me as though there were some pity for 
me in Miss Haldin's prolonged glance. She stepped out a little 
quicker. 
   {op"}You ask for all the details. Let me see. I ought to 
remember them. It was novel enough for a{ -- }a village girl like me." 
.p292 
   After a moment of silence she remarked that the Chateau 
Borel was almost as neglected inside as outside. It was nothing 
to wonder at. A Hamburg banker, I believe, retired 
from business had it built to cheer his 
remaining days by the view of that lake whose precise, orderly and 
well-to-do beauty must have been attractive to the unromantic imagination of 
a banker. But he died soon. His wife departed too (but only to 
Italy) and this house of moneyed ease, presumably unsaleable and 
lamentably unlet had stood empty for several years. One went up 
to it along a gravel drive, round a large, coarse grass-plot, with plenty of time to observe 
the degradation of its stuccoed front. Miss Haldin said that 
the impression was unpleasant. It grew more depressing as one 
came nearer. 
   She observed green stains of moss on the steps of the terrace. 
The front door stood wide open. There was no one about. She 
found herself in a wide, lofty and absolutely empty hall with a 
good many doors. These doors were all shut. A broad stone 
staircase faced her. The effect of the whole was of an untenanted 
house. She stood still, disconcerted by the solitude, but after 
a while she became aware of a voice speaking continuously 
somewhere. 
   {op"}You were probably being observed all the same," I suggested. 
{op"}There must have been eyes." 
   {op"}I don't see how that could be," she retorted. {op"}I haven't 
.p293 
even seen a bird in the grounds. I don't remember hearing a 
single twitter in the trees. The whole place appeared utterly 
deserted except for the voice." 
   She could not make out the language{ -- }Russian French or 
German. No one seemed to answer it. It was as though the voice had 
been left behind by the departed inhabitants to talk to the bare 
walls. It went on volubly with a pause now and then. It was 
lonely and mad. The time seemed very long to Miss Haldin. An 
invincible repugnance prevented her from opening one of the doors 
in the hall. It was so hopeless. No one would come, the voice 
would never stop. She confessed to me that she had to resist an 
impulse to turn round and go away unseen as she had come. 
   {op"}Really? You had that impulse?" I cried full of regret. 
{op"}What a pity you did not obey it." 
   She shook her head. 
   {op"}What a strange memory it would have been for one. Those 
deserted grounds, that empty hall, that impersonal, voluble voice 
and{ -- }nobody, nothing, not a soul." 
   The memory would have been unique and harmless. But 
she was not a girl to run away from an intimidating impression of 
solitude and mystery. {op"}No I did not run away" she said. {op"}I 
stayed where I was{ -- }and I did meet a soul. Such a strange soul." 
   As she was gazing up the broad staircase and had concluded 
that the voice came from somewhere above, a rustle of dress and 
.p294 
light footsteps attracted her attention. She looked down and saw 
a woman crossing the hall, having issued apparently through one of 
the many doors. Her face was averted so that at first she was 
not aware of Miss Haldin. 
   On turning her head and seeing a stranger she appeared very 
much startled. From her slender figure Miss Haldin had taken her 
for a young girl; but if her face was almost childishly round it 
was also sallow and wrinkled with dark rings under the eyes. A 
thick crop of dusty brown hair was parted boyishly on the side 
with a lateral wave above the dry furrowed forehead. After 
a moment of dumb blinking she suddenly squatted down on the floor. 
   {op"}What do you mean{ -- }squatted down?" I asked astonished. 
{op"}This is a very strange detail." 
   Miss Haldin explained the reason. This person when first seen 
was carrying a small bowl in her hand. She had squatted to set 
it down on the floor for the benefit of a large cat which appeared 
then suddenly from behind her skirts and put its head into the 
bowl greedily. She got up and approaching Miss Haldin asked with 
nervous bluntness. 
   {op"}What do you want? Who are you?" 
   Miss Haldin mentioned her name and also the name of Peter 
Ivanovitch. The girlish, elderly woman nodded and puckered her 
face into a momentary expression of sympathy. Her black silk 
blouse was old and even frayed in places; the black serge skirt 
.p295 
was short and shabby. She continued to blink at close quarters 
and her eyelashes and eyebrows seemed worn out too. Miss Haldin 
speaking gently to her as if to an unhappy and sensitive person 
explained how it was that her visit could not be an altogether 
unexpected event to Mme de S{---}. 
   {op"}Ah! Peter Ivanovitch brought you an invitation. How was I 
to know. A {it}dame de compagnie{ro} is not consulted as you may imagine." 
The shabby woman laughed a little. Her teeth splendidly white 
and admirably even, 
looked absurdly out of place, like a string of pearls on the neck 
of a ragged 
.p296 
tramp. {op"}Peter Ivanovitch is the greatest genius of the century 
perhaps but he is the most inconsiderate man living. So if you have 
an appointment with him you must not be surprised to hear that 
he is not here." 
   Miss Haldin protested that she had no appointment with Peter 
Ivanovitch. She became interested at once in that bizarre person. 
That last made her grimace of significant silence and started off 
again. 
   {op"}Why should he put himself out for you or anyone else? Oh! 
these geniuses. If you only knew! Yes! And their books{ -- }I 
mean of course the books that the world admires, the inspired books. 
But you have not been behind the scenes. Wait till you have to 
sit at a table for a half-a-day with a pen in your hand. He can 
walk up and down his rooms for hours and hours. I used to get so 
stiff and numb as I sat that I was afraid I would lose my balance 
and fall off the chair all at once." 
   She kept her hands folded in front of her and her eyes fixed 
on Miss Haldin's face betrayed no animation whatever. Their 
expression was that of quiet conviction. Miss Haldin gathering 
that the lady who called herself a {it}dame de compagnie{ro} was proud of 
having acted as secretary to Peter Ivanovitch made an amiable 
remark. 
   {op"}You could not imagine a more trying experience" protested the 
lady. {op"}There is an 
Anglo-American journalist with Mme de S{---} now or I would take you up" she 
.p297 
continued in a changed tone and glancing towards the staircase. 
{op"}I act as master of ceremonies." 
   It appeared that Mme de S{---} could not bear Swiss servants 
about her person; and indeed servants would not stay for very 
long in the Chateau Borel. There were always difficulties. Miss 
Haldin had already noticed that the hall was like a dusty barn of 
marble and stucco with cobwebs in the corners and faint tracks of 
mud on the black and white tesselated floor. 
   {op"}I look also after this animal" continued the {it}dame de 
compagnie{ro} keeping her hands folded quietly in front of her; and she 
bent her worn gaze upon the cat. {op"}I don't mind a bit. Animals 
have their rights; though strictly speaking I see no reason why 
they should not suffer as well as human beings. Do you? But of 
course they never suffer so much. That is impossible. Only in 
their case it is more pitiful because they cannot make a 
revolution. I used to be a Republican. I suppose you are a 
Republican?" 
   Miss Haldin confessed to me that she did not know what to say. 
But she nodded slightly and asked in her turn. 
   {op"}And are you then no longer a republican?" 
   {op"}After taking down Peter Ivanovitch from dictation for two 
years, it's difficult for me to be anything. First of all you have 
to sit perfectly motionless. The slightest movement you make puts 
to flight the ideas of Peter Ivanovitch. You hardly dare to 
breathe. And as to coughing{ -- }God forbid! Peter Ivanovitch 
.p298 
changed the position of the table to the wall because at first I 
could not help raising my eyes to look out of the window while 
waiting for him to go on with his dictation. That was not allowed. 
He said I stared so stupidly. I was likewise not permitted to 
look at him over my shoulder. Instantly Peter Ivanovitch stamped 
his foot and would roar {op'}Look down on the paper!' It seems my 
expression, my face put him off. Well, I know that I am not 
beautiful, and that my expression is not hopeful either. He said 
that my air of unintelligent expectation irritated him. These 
are his own words." 
   Miss Haldin was shocked but she confessed to me that she was 
not altogether surprised. 
   {op"}Is it possible that Peter Ivanovitch could treat any woman 
so rudely?" she asked. 
   The {it}dame de compagnie{ro} nodded several times with her air of 
discretion then assured Miss Haldin that she did not mind in the 
least. The trying part of it was to have the secret of the 
composition laid bare before her; to see the great author of 
the revolutionary gospels grope for words as if he 
were in the dark as to what he meant to say. 
   {op"}I am quite willing to be the blind instrument of higher ends. 
To give one's life for the cause is nothing. But to have one's 
illusions destroyed{ -- }that is really almost more than one can bear. 
.p299 
   {op"}I really don't exaggerate" she insisted. {op"}It seemed to 
freeze my very beliefs in me{ -- }the more so that when we worked in 
winter Peter Ivanovitch walking up and down the room required no 
artificial heat to keep himself warm. Even in the South of France 
there are bitterly cold days especially when you have to sit still 
for six hours at a stretch. The walls of these villas are so 
flimsy. Peter Ivanovitch did not seem to be aware of anything. 
It is true that I kept down my shivers from fear of putting him 
out. I used to set my teeth till my jaw felt absolutely locked. 
In the moments when Peter Ivanovitch interrupted his dictation, 
and sometimes these intervals were very long{ -- }often twenty minutes 
no less, while he walked to and fro behind my back muttering to 
himself{ -- }I felt I was dying by inches, I assure you. Perhaps if 
I had let my teeth rattle Peter Ivanovitch might have noticed my 
distress, but I don't think it would have had any practical effect. 
She's very miserly in such matters." 
   The dame de compagnie glanced up the staircase. The big cat 
had finished the milk and was rubbing its whiskered cheek sinuously 
against her skirt. She dived suddenly to snatch it up from the 
floor. 
   {op"}Miserliness is rather a quality than otherwise, you know" 
she continued holding the cat in her folded arms. {op"}With us it is 
misers who can spare money for worthy objects{ -- }not the so-called 
generous natures. But pray don't think I am a sybarite. My father 
.p300 
was a clerk in the Ministry of Finances with no position at all. 
You may guess by this that our home was far from luxurious, though 
of course we did not actually suffer from cold. I ran away from 
my parents, you know, but that could not happen till it so chanced 
that I began to think by myself. It is not very easy, such 
thinking. One has got to be put in the way of it, awakened to the 
truth. I am indebted for my salvation to an old applewoman who had 
her stall under the gateway of the house we lived in. She had a 
kind wrinkled face and the most friendly voice imaginable. One day, 
casually we began to talk about a child, a ragged little girl we 
had seen begging from men in the streets at dusk; and from one 
thing to another my eyes began to open gradually to the horrors 
from which innocent people are made to suffer in this world only in 
order that governments might exist. After I once understood the 
crime of the upper classes I could not go on living with my parents. 
Not a single charitable word was to be heard in our home from year's 
end to year's end; there was nothing but the talk of vile office 
intrigues, and of promotion and of salaries, and of courting the 
favour of the chiefs. The mere idea of marrying one day such 
another man as my father made me shudder. I don't mean to let you 
think there was anyone wanting to marry me. There was not the 
slightest prospect of anything of the kind. But was it not a sin 
enough to live on a government salary while half Russia was dying 
of hunger. The Ministry of Finances! What a grotesque horror it 
is! What does the starving ignorant people want with a Ministry 
.p301 
of Finances. I kissed my old folks on both cheeks and went away 
from them to live in cellars, with the proletariat. I tried to 
make myself useful to the utterly hopeless. I suppose you 
understand what I mean? I mean the people who have nowhere to go and 
nothing to look forward to in this life. Do you understand how 
frightful that is{ -- }nothing to look forward to! Sometimes I think 
that it is only in Russia that there are such people and such a 
depth of misery can be reached. Well I plunged into it and{ -- }do 
you know there isn't much that one can do in there. No indeed{ -- }at least as long as there are Ministries of Finances and such like  grotesque horrors to stand in the way. I suppose I would have gone 
mad there just trying to fight the vermin if it had not been for a 
man. It was my old friend and teacher the poor saintly applewoman 
who discovered him for me, quite accidentally. She came to fetch 
me late one evening in her quiet way. I followed her where she 
would lead: that part of my life was in her hands altogether and 
without her my spirit would have perished miserably. The man was 
a young workman, a lithographer by trade and he had got into 
trouble in connection with that affair of temperance tracts{ -- }you 
remember. There was a lot of people put in prison for that. The 
Ministry of Finances again! What would become of it if the poor 
folk ceased making beasts of themselves with drink? Upon my word 
I would think that finances and all the rest of it are an invention 
of the devil{ -- }if I believed in a personal devil. Only the belief 
.p302 
in a supernatural source of evil is not necessary; men alone are 
quite capable of every wickedness. Finances, indeed!" 
   Hatred and contempt hissed in her utterance of the word 
{op"}finances", but at the very moment she stroked gently the cat 
reposing in her arms. She even raised them slightly and inclining 
her head rubbed her cheek against the fur of the animal which 
received this career with that complete detachment so characteristic 
of its kind. Then looking at Miss Haldin she excused herself once 
more for not taking her upstairs to Mrs. S{---}. The interview could 
not be interrupted. Presently the journalist would be seen coming 
down the stairs. The best thing was to remain in the hall; and 
besides all these rooms (she glanced all round at the many doors) 
all these rooms on the ground floor were unfurnished. 
   {op"}Positively there is no chair down here to offer you" she 
continued. {op"}But if you prefer your own thoughts to my chatter I 
will sit down on the bottom step here and keep silent." 
   Miss Haldin hastened to protest. On the contrary she was 
very much interested in the story of the journeyman lithographer. 
He was a revolutionist, of course. 
   {op"}A martyr, a simple man," said the dame de compagnie with 
a faint sigh and gazing through the open front door dreamily. 
She turned her misty brown eyes on Miss Haldin. 
   {op"}I lived with him for four months. It was like a nightmare." 
   As Miss Haldin looked at her steadily she began to describe 
.p303 
the emaciated face of the man, his fleshless limbs, his 
destitution. The room into which the apple-woman had led her was a tiny 
garret, a miserable den under the roof of a sordid house. The 
plaster fallen off the walls covered the floor and when the door 
was opened a horrible tapestry of black cobwebs waved in the 
draught. He had been liberated a few days before{ -- }flung out of 
prison into the streets. And Miss Haldin seemed to see for the 
first time a name and a face upon the body of that suffering people 
whose hard fate had been the subject of so many conversations 
between her and her brother in the garden of their country house. 
   He had been arrested with scores and scores of other people 
in that affair of the lithographed temperance tracts. Unluckily 
having got hold of a great many suspected persons the police 
thought they could extract from some of them other information 
relating to the revolutionist propaganda. 
   {op"}They beat him so cruelly in the course of investigation" 
went on the dame de compagnie {op"}that they injured him internally. 
When they had done with him he was doomed. He could do nothing for 
himself. I beheld him lying on a wooden bedstead without any 
bedding, with his head on a bundle of dirty rags lent to him out of 
charity by an old rag-picker who happened to live in the basement 
of the house. There he was uncovered, burning with fever and there 
was not even a jug in the room for the water to quench his thirst 
with. There was nothing whatever{ -- }just that bedstead and the bare 
floor." 
.p304 
   {op"}Was there no one in all that great town amongst the liberals 
and revolutionaries to extend a helping hand to a brother," asked 
Miss Haldin indignantly. 
   {op"}Yes. But you do not know the most terrible part of that 
man's misery. Listen. It seems that they ill-used him so 
atrociously that at last his firmness gave way and he did let out 
some information. Poor soul, the flesh is weak you know. What it 
was he did not tell me. There was a crushed spirit in that 
mangled body. Nothing I found to say could make him whole. When 
they let him out he crept into that hole and bore his remorse 
stoically. He would not go near anyone he knew, I would have 
sought assistance for him but indeed where could I have gone 
looking for it? Where was I to look for anyone who had anything 
to spare or any power to help. The people living round us were 
all starving and drunken. They were the victims of the Ministry 
of Finances. Don't ask me how we lived. I couldn't tell you. 
It was like a miracle of wretchedness. I had nothing to sell and 
I assure you my clothes were in such a state that it was 
impossible for me to go out in the daytime. I was indecent. I had to 
wait till it was dark before I ventured into the streets to beg for 
a crust of bread, or whatever I could get to keep him and me alive. 
Often I got nothing and then I would crawl back and lie on the 
floor by the side of his couch. Oh yes, I can sleep quite soundly 
on bare boards. That is nothing, and I am only mentioning it to 
you so that you should not think I am a sybarite. It was infinitely 
.p305 
less killing than the task of sitting for hours at a table in a 
cold study to take the books of Peter Ivanovitch from dictation. 
But you shall see yourself what that is like so I needn't say any 
more about it." 
   {op"}It is by no means certain that I will ever take Peter 
Ivanovitch from dictation" Miss Haldin protested. 
   {op"}No!" said the other incredulously. {op"}Not certain? You mean 
to say that you have not made up your mind?" 
   When Miss Haldin assured her that there never had been any 
question of that between her and Peter Ivanovitch, the woman with 
the cat compressed her lips tightly for a moment. 
   {op"}Oh, you will find yourself settled at the table before you 
know that you have made up your mind. Don't you make a mistake; 
it is disenchanting to hear Peter Ivanovitch dictate, but at the 
same time there is a fascination about it. He is a man of genius. 
Your face is certain not to irritate him; you may perhaps even 
help his inspiration, make it easier for him to deliver his 
message. As I look at you I feel certain that you are the kind of 
woman who is not likely to check the flow of his inspiration." 
   Miss Haldin thought it useless to protest against all these 
assumptions. 
   {op"}But this man{ -- }this workman{ -- }did he die under your care" 
she said after a short silence. 
   The dame de compaginie listening up the stairs where two voices 
.p306 
were alternating with some animation made no answer for a time. 
When the loud sounds of the discussion had sunk into an almost 
inaudible murmur she turned to Miss Haldin. 
   {op"}Yes, he died," she said, {op"}but not literally speaking in my 
arms as you might suppose. As a matter of fact I was asleep when 
he breathed his last. So even now I cannot say I have seen anybody 
die. A few days before the end some young men had found us out in 
our extremity. They were revolutionists, as you might guess. He 
ought to have trusted in his political friends when he came out of 
prison. He had been liked and respected before and nobody would 
have dreamed to reproaching him with his indiscretion before the 
police. Everybody knows how they go to work and the strongest man 
has his moments of weakness before pain. Why even hunger alone is 
enough to give one queer ideas as to what may be done. A doctor 
came, our lot was alleviated as far as physical comforts go, but 
otherwise he could not be consoled{ -- }poor man. I assure you, Miss 
Haldin that he was very lovable, but I had not the strength to weep. 
I was nearly dead myself. But there were kind hearts to take care 
of me. A decent dress was found to clothe my nakedness. I tell 
you, I was not decent{ -- }and after a time the revolutionists placed 
me with a Jewish family going abroad, as governess. Of course I 
could teach the children, I finished the 6th class of the Lyceum; 
but the real object was that I should be useful to the cause. I 
had to carry some important papers across the frontier. I was 
entrusted with a packet which I carried next my breast. The 
.p307 
gendarmes at the station did not suspect the governess of a Jewish 
family, busy looking after three children. I don't suppose those 
Hebrews knew what I had on me, for I had been introduced to them in 
a very roundabout way by persons who did not belong to the 
revolutionary movement, and naturally I had been instructed to accept 
a very small salary. When we reached Germany I left that family 
and delivered my papers to a revolutionist in Stuttgard. After that 
I was employed in various ways. But you do not want to hear of that. 
I have never felt that I was very useful but I live in hopes of 
seeing all the Ministries destroyed, finances and all. The greatest 
joy of my life has been to hear what your brother has done." 
   She directed her round eyes 
.p308 
again to the sunshine outside 
while the cat reposing within her folded arms had an air of 
lordly beatitude and sphinx-like meditation. 
   {op"}Yes! I rejoiced"' she began again. {op"}For me there is a 
heroic ring about the very name of Haldin. They must have 
been trembling with fear in their ministries{ -- }all those men 
with fiendish hearts. Here I stand talking to you and when I 
think of all the cruelties, oppressions and injustices that are 
going on at this very moment my head begins to swim. I have 
looked closely at what would seem inconceivable if one's own 
eyes had not to be trusted. I have looked at things that made 
me hate myself for my helplessness. I hated my hands that had no 
power, my voice that could not be heard, my very mind that 
would not become unhinged. Ah! I have seen things. And you?". 
   Miss Haldin was moved. She shook her head slightly. 
   {op"}No, I have seen nothing for myself as yet", she murmured. 
   {op"}We lived always in the country. It was my brother's wish." 
   {op"}It is a curious meeting{ -- }this{ -- }between you and me", 
continued the other. {op"}Do you believe in chance, Miss Haldin? 
How could I have expected to see you, his sister, with my own 
eyes. Do you know that when the news came the revolutionaries 
here were as much surprised as pleased, every bit. No one 
seemed to know anything about your brother. Peter Ivanovitch 
himself had not foreseen that such a blow was going to be 
struck. I suppose your brother was simply inspired. I 
.p309 
myself think that such deeds should be done by inspiration. It 
is a great privilege to have the inspiration and the opportunity. 
Did he resemble you at all? Don't you rejoice, Miss Haldin?". 
   {op"}You must not expect too much from me", said Miss Haldin, 
repressing an inclination to cry which came over her suddenly. 
She succeeded, then added calmly. {op"}I am not a herioc person". 
   {op"}You think you couldn't have done such a thing yourself 
perhaps?". 
   {op"}I don't know. I must not even ask myself till I have lived 
a little longer, seen more . . .". 
   The other moved her head appreciatively. The purring of 
the cat had a loud complacency in the empty hall. No sound of 
voices came from upstairs. Miss Haldin broke the silence. 
   {op"}What is it precisely that you heard people say about my 
brother. You said that they were surprised. Yes, I suppose 
they were. Did it not seem strange to them that my brother should have 
failed to save himself after the most difficult part{ -- }that is 
getting away from the spot{ -- }was over? 
Conspirators should understand these things well. There are reasons 
why I am very anxious to know". 
   The dame de compagnie had advanced to the open hall door. 
She glanced rapidly over her shoulder at Miss Haldin who remained 
within the hall. 
   {op"}Succeed to escape", she repeated absently. {op"}Didn't he make 
the sacrifice of his life? Wasn't he just simply inspired? 
Wasn't it an act of abnegation? Aren't you certain?" 
   {op"}What I am certain of", said Miss Haldin, {op"}is that it was 
not an act of despair.  Have you not 
heard some opinion expressed here upon his miserable capture?" 
   The dame de compagnie mused for a while in the doorway. 
   {op"}Did I hear? Of course everything is discussed here. 
Has not all the world been speaking about your brother?{ -- }For my 
part the mere mention of his achievement plunges me into an 
envious ecstasy. Why should a man certain of immortality 
think of his life at all?" 
   She kept her back turned to Miss Haldin. Upstairs from 
behind a great dingy white and gold door visible behind the 
balustrade of the first floor landing, a deep voice began to 
drone formally as if reading over notes or something of the 
sort. It paused frequently and then ceased altogether. 
   {op"}I don't think I can stay any longer", said Miss Haldin. 
{op"}I will return another day". 
   She waited for the dame de compagnie to make room for her 
.p311 
exit but that last did not move. She appeared lost in the 
contemplation of sunshine and shadows sharing between themselves 
the stillness of the deserted grounds. She concealed the 
view of the drive from Miss Haldin. Suddenly she said: 
   {op"}It is not necessary; here is Peter Ivanovitch himself 
coming up. But he is not alone. He is seldom alone now". 
   Hearing that Peter Ivanovitch was approaching Miss Haldin 
was not so pleased as she might have been expected to be. 
Somehow she had lost the desire to see either the heroic captive 
or Madame de S. and the reason of that shrinking which came upon 
her at the very last minute is accounted for by the feeling 
that those two people had not been treating kindly the woman 
with the cat. 
   {op"}Would you please let me pass", said Miss Haldin at last, 
touching lightly the shoulder of the dame de compagnie. 
   But the other pressing the cat to her breast did not budge. 
   {op"}I know who it is with him", she said without even looking 
back. More unaccountably than ever Miss Haldin felt a strong 
impulse to leave the house. 
   {op"}Madame de S. may be engaged for some time yet, and what I 
have got to say to Peter Ivanovitch is just a simple question 
.p312 
which I might put to him when I meet him in the grounds on my 
way down. I really think I will go. I have been some time 
here and I am anxious to get back to my mother. Will you let 
me pass please?" 
   The dame de compagnie turned her head at last. 
   {op"}I never supposed that you really wanted to see Madame de 
S." she said, with unexpected insight. {op"}Not for a moment". 
There was something confidential and mysterious in her tone. 
She passed through the door with Miss Haldin following her, on 
to the terrace, and they descended side by side 
the moss-grown stone steps. There 
was no one to be seen on such stretches of the drive as were 
visible from the front of the house. 
   {op"}They are hidden by the trees over there", explained Miss 
Haldin's new acquaintance, {op"}but you shall see them directly. 
I don't know who that young man is to whom Peter Ivanovitch has 
taken such a fancy. He must be one of us or he would not 
be admitted here when the others come. You know who I mean 
by the others. But I must say that he is not at all mystically 
inclined. I don't know that I have made him out yet. Naturally 
I am never for very long in the drawing-room. There is always 
something to do for me, though the establishment here is not so 
extensive as the villa on the Riviera. But still, there are 
plenty of opportunities for me to make myself useful". 
   To the left, passing by the ivy-grown end of the stables 
.p313 
appeared Peter Ivanovitch and his companion. They walked 
very slowly, conversing with some animation, and just then they 
even stopped for a moment and Peter Ivanovitch was seen to 
gesticulate, discoursing while the young man listened motionless, 
with his arms hanging down and his head bowed a little. He 
was dressed in a dark grey suit and a black hat. The round 
eyes of the dame de compagnie remained fixed on the two 
figures which had resumed their leisurely approach. 
   {op"}An extremely civil young man", she said. {op"}You will see 
what a bow he will make; and it won't be altogether only at 
your intention either. He bows in the same way when he meets 
me alone in the hall". 
   She moved on a few steps with Miss Haldin by her side and 
things happened just as she had foretold. The young man took 
off his hat, bowed slightly and fell back while Peter 
Ivanovitch advanced quicker, his black thick arms extended 
heartily and seized hold of both Miss Haldin's hands, shook 
them and peered at her through his dark glasses which gave him 
the impenetrable air of a masked man, a face without expression. 
   {op"}That's right, that's right!" he exclaimed twice approvingly. 
{op"}And so you have been looked after by . . ." He frowned 
slightly at the dame de compagnie who was still nursing the 
cat. {op"} . . . I conclude Eleanor{ -- }Madame de S.{ -- }is engaged. 
I know she expected somebody today. So the newspaper man did 
turn up, eh? She is engaged?" 
.p314 
   For all answer the dame de compagnie turned away her head. 
   {op"}It is very unfortunate{ -- }very unfortunate indeed. I 
very much regret that you should have been . . ." He lowered 
suddenly his voice. {op"}But what is it{ -- }surely you are not 
departing Natalia Viktrovna? You got bored waiting, didn't 
you?" 
   {op"}Not in the least", Miss Haldin protested. {op"}Only I have 
been here some time and I am anxious to get back to my mother." 
   {op"}The time seemed long, eh? I am afraid our worthy friend 
here" (Peter Ivanovitch suddenly jerked his head sideways 
towards his right shoulder and jerked it up again) {op"}our worthy 
friend here had not the art of shortening the moments of  
waiting. No, distinctly she has not the art; and in that 
respect good intentions alone count for nothing". 
   The dame de compagnie dropped her arms and the cat found 
itself suddenly on the ground. It remained quite still after 
alighting, one hind leg stretched backwards. Miss Haldin was 
extremely indignant on behalf of the lady companion. 
   {op"}Believe me, Peter Ivanovitch, that the moments I have 
passed in the hall of this house have been not a little 
interesting and very instructive too. They are memorable. I 
do not regret the waiting but I see that the 
object of my call here can be attained without taking up Mrs. 
S{---}'s time." 
.p315 
   At this point I interrupted Miss Haldin. The above 
relation is founded on her narrative which I have not so much 
dramatised as might be supposed. She had rendered with 
extraordinary feeling and animation the very accent almost of the 
disciple of the old applewoman, the irreconcilable hater of 
ministries, the voluntary servant of the poor. Miss Haldin's true and delicate 
humanity was extremely shocked by the uncongenial fate of her 
new acquaintance that lady companion, secretary, whatever she 
was. For my own part I was pleased to discover in it one more 
obstacle to intimacy with Mme de S{---}. I had a positive 
abhorrence for the painted, bedizened dead-faced, glassy eyed 
Egeria of Peter Ivanovitch. 
.p316 
I do not know what was her attitude 
to the unseen, but I know that in the affairs of this world 
she was avaricious, greedy and unscrupulous. 
It was within my knowledge that 
she had been worsted in a sordid and desperate quarrel 
about money matters with the family of her late husband the 
diplomatist. Some very august personages indeed (whom in her fury she had insisted 
upon scandalously involving in her affairs) had incurred her 
animosity. I find it perfectly easy to believe that she had come 
.p317 
to within an ace of being spirited away for reasons of state 
into some discreet maison de Sante{a}{ -- }a mad house of sorts, to 
be plain. It appears however that certain other high placed 
personages opposed it for reasons which. . . . 
   But it's no use to go into details. 
.p318 
   Wonder may be expressed at a man in the position of a 
teacher of languages knowing all this with such definiteness. 
A novelist says this and that of his personages and if only he 
knows how to say it earnestly enough he may not be questioned 
upon the inventions of his brain in which his own belief is 
made sufficiently manifest by a telling phrase, a poetic image, 
the accent of emotion. Art is great! But I have no art 
and in this attempt at writing, if I am trying to tell a story, 
I do not aspire to achieve a novel. 
Not having invented Mrs. de S{---} I feel bound to explain how 
I came to know so much about her. 
.p319 
   My informant was the Russian wife of a friend of mine already 
mentioned, the professor of Lausanne University. 
It was from her that I learned the last fact of Mrs. de 
S{---}'s history with which I intend to trouble my readers. She 
told me speaking positively as a person who trusts her sources 
of the cause of Mrs. de S{---}'s flight, from Russia some years 
before,. It was neither more nor less than this: that she 
became suspect to the police in connection with the assassination 
of the Emperor Alexander II. The ground of this suspicion was 
either some unguarded expressions that escaped her in public 
or some talk overheard in her salon. Overheard we must believe 
by some guest, perhaps a friend who hastened to play the 
informer, I suppose. At any rate the overheard-matter seemed to 
imply her foreknowledge of that event and I think she was 
wise in not waiting for the investigation of such a charge. 
.p320 
Some of my readers may remember a little book from her pen 
published in Paris, a mystically bad tempered, declamatory and 
frightfully disconnected piece of writing in which she all but 
admits the foreknowledge, more than hints, at its supernatural 
origin and plainly suggests in venomous innuendoes that the 
guilt of the act was not with the terrorists but with a palace 
intrigue. When I 
observed to my friend the professor's wife that the life of Mme 
de S{---} with its unofficial diplomacy, its intrigues, lawsuits, 
favours, disgrace, expulsions, it's atmosphere of scandal, 
occultism and charlatanism was more fit for the 18th century 
than for the conditions of our own time she assented with a 
smile, but a moment after went on in a reflective 
tone. {op"}Charlatanism?{ -- }yes, in a certain measure. Still the 
times are changed. There are forces now which were non-existent in the 18th century. I should not be surprised if she were 
more dangerous than an Englishman would be willing to believe. 
And what's more she is looked upon as really dangerous 
by certain people{ -- }chez nous. 
   Chez nous in this connection meant Russia in general and 
.p321 
the Russian political police in particular. The object of my 
digression from the straight course of Miss Haldin's relation 
(in my own words) of her visit to the Chateau Borel was to 
bring forward that statement of 
my friend the professor's wife. I wanted to bring it forward 
simply to make what I have to say presently of Mr. Razumor prescence 
in Geneva a little more credible{ -- }for this is a Russian story for western 
ears which, as I have observed already, are not attuned to 
certain tones of cynicism and cruelty of moral negation{ -- }and 
even of moral distress{ -- }already silenced at our end of Europe. 
And this I state as my excuse for having left Miss Haldin standing, 
one of the little group of two women and two men who had come 
together below 
.p322 
the terrace of the Chateau Borel. 
   The knowledge which I have stated above was in my mind 
when, as I have said, I interrupted Miss Haldin. I interrupted 
her with the cry of profound satisfaction. 
   {op"}So, you never saw Mrs. de S{---} after all." 
   Miss Haldin shook her head. It was very 
satisfactory to me. I am putting it very mildly when I say that 
this contact could give her no advantage. She had not seen 
Mrs. de S{---}! That was excellent, excellent! I welcomed the 
conviction that she would never know Mme de S{---} now. I
could not explain the reason of the conviction but by 
the knowledge that 
Miss Haldin was standing face to face 
with her brother's wonderful friend. I preferred him to 
Mme de S{---} as the companion and guide of that young girl 
abandoned to her inexperience by the miserable end of her 
brother. But at any rate that life now ended had been sincere 
and perhaps its thoughts might have been lofty, its moral 
sufferings profound, its last act a true sacrifice. It is not 
for us the staid lovers calmed by the possession of a conquered 
liberty to condemn without appeal the fierceness of thwarted 
desire. 
.p323 
   I am not 
ashamed of the warmth of my regard for Miss Haldin. It was, 
it must be admitted, an unselfish sentiment being its own 
reward. The late Victor Haldin{ -- }in the light of that 
sentiment{ -- }appeared to me not as a sinister 
conspirator but as a pure enthusiast. I did not wish indeed 
to judge him but the very fact that he did not escape, that 
fact which brought so much trouble to both his mother and his 
sister spoke to me in his favour. Meantime 
in my fear of seeing the girl surrender to the influence of the 
Chateau Borel revolutionary feminism, I was more than willing 
to put my trust in that friend of the late Victor Haldin. He 
was nothing but a name{ -- }you will say. Exactly. A name. And 
what's more the only name; the only name to be found in the 
.p324 
correspondence between brother and sister; the only link with 
that mental and emotional past of interchanged ideas between 
these two, which must fatally shape the future of the one who 
was left bereaved of all support except for the unique legacy 
of that name. The young man had turned up; they had come face 
to face and fortunately without the direct interference of 
Mme. de S{---}. What will come of it; what will 
she tell me presently? I was asking myself. 
   Of course it was open to her to say nothing more. 
She seemed to be weighing something 
in her mind. It occurred to me not for the first time 
that it was not intellect which was the stamp of that admirably 
poised head but courage the most fascinating virtue in a woman. 
It was only natural that as I took my eyes off her my thought 
should turn to the young man, the bearer of the only name 
.p325 
uttered in all the dreamtalk of a future to be brought about 
by a revolution. And my thought took the shape of asking 
myself why this young man had not called upon these ladies? He 
had been in Geneva for some days before Miss Haldin heard of 
him first in my presence, from Peter Ivanovitch. 
I regretted that last's presence, 
at their meeting. I would rather have had it happen somewhere 
out of his spectacled sight. But I supposed that having both 
.p326 
these young people there he introduced them to each other. 
   I broke the silence by beginning a question on that point. 
   {op"}I suppose Peter Ivanovitch. . . ." 
   Miss Haldin gave vent to her indignation. Peter 
Ivanovitch directly he had got his answer from her had turned 
upon the dame de compagnie in a shameful manner. 
   {op"}Turned upon her?" I wondered. {op"}What about? For what
reason?" 
   {op"}It was unheard of; it was shameful," Miss Haldin pursued 
with angry eyes. {op"}{it}Il lui a fait une scene{ro}{ -- }like this, before strangers. And 
for what? You would never guess. For some eggs. . . . Oh!" 
   I was astonished. {op"}Eggs did you say?" 
   {op"}For Mme. de S{---}. That lady observes a special 
diet or something of the sort. It seems she had complained the day 
before to Peter Ivanovitch 
that the eggs were not rightly prepared. Peter 
Ivanovitch suddenly remembered this 
against the poor woman and flew out at her. It was most 
astonishing. I stood as if rooted." 
   {op"}Do you mean to say that the great feminist allowed 
himself to be abusive to a woman?" I asked. 
   {op"}Oh! Not that. It was something you have no conception 
of. It was an odious performance. Imagine he raised his hat 
to begin with. He made his voice soft and deprecatory. {op"}Ah! 
.p327 
you are not kind to us{ -- }you will not deign to remember. . . ." 
This sort of phrases, that sort of tone. The poor creature 
was terribly upset. Her eyes ran full of tears. She did not 
know where to look. I shouldn't wonder if she would have rather 
preferred abuse or even a blow." 
   I did not remark that very possibly she was familiar with 
both on occasions when no one was by. Miss Haldin walked by my 
side, her head up in scornful and angry silence. 
   {op"}Great men have their surprising peculiarities" I observed inanely. 
{op"}Exactly like men who are not great. But that sort of thing 
can not be kept up for ever. How did the great feminist wind 
up this very characteristic episode?" 
   Miss Haldin without turning her face my way told me that 
the end was brought about by the appearance of the interviewer 
who had been closeted with Mme de S{---}. 
   He came up rapidly, unnoticed, 
lifted his hat slightly and paused to say in 
French {op"}The Baroness has asked me in case I met a lady on my 
way out to desire her to come in at once." 
   After delivering this message he hurried down the drive. The 
dame de compagnie flew towards the house and Peter Ivanovitch 
.p328 
followed her hastily looking uneasy. In a moment Miss Haldin 
found herself alone with the 
.p329 
young man who undoubtedly must have been the new arrival from 
Russia. She wondered whether her 
brother's friend had not already guessed who she was. 
   I am in a position to say that as a matter of fact he had 
guessed. It is clear 
to me that Peter Ivanovitch for some reason or other had 
refrained from alluding to these ladies' presence in Geneva. But 
Razumov had guessed. The trustful girl! Every word uttered by 
Haldin lived in Razumov's memory. They 
were like haunting shapes; 
they could not be exorcised. The most vivid 
amongst them was the mention of the sister. The 
girl had existed for him ever since. But he did 
not recognise her at once. Coming up with Peter Ivanovitch 
.p330 
he did observe her; their eyes 
had met even. He had responded, as no one could help responding 
to the harmonious charm of her whole person, its strength, its 
grace, its tranquil frankness{ -- }and then he had turned his gaze away. 
He said to 
.p331 
himself that all this was not for him; the beauty of women and 
the friendship of men were not for him. He accepted that 
feeling with a purposeful 
sternness and tried to pass on. It was only her outstretched 
hand which brought about the recognition. It stands recorded 
in the pages of his self confession that it nearly 
suffocated him physically with an emotional reaction 
of hate and dismay as though her appearance had 
been a piece of accomplished treachery. 
.p332 
   He faced about. 
The considerable elevation of the the terrace concealed 
them from any one lingering in the doorway of the house; and 
even from the upstairs windows they could not have been seen. 
Through the thickets run wild and the trees of the gently 
sloping grounds he had cold, placid glimpses of the lake. A moment of 
perfect privacy had been vouchsafed to them at this juncture. 
I wondered to myself what use they had made of that fortunate 
circumstance. 
   {op"}Did you have time for more than a few words," I asked. 
   That animation with which 
she had related me the incidents of her visit to the Chateau 
Borel had left her completely. Strolling by my side she looked 
straight before her; but I noticed a little 
colour on her cheek. She did not answer me. 
   After some little time 
I observed that they could not have hoped to remain 
forgotten for very long, unless the other two had discovered 
Mme de S{---} swooning with fatigue perhaps or in a state of 
morbid exaltation after the long interview. Either would 
.p333 
require their devoted ministrations. I could depict to myself 
Peter Ivanovitch rushing busily out of the house again, bareheaded, perhaps and on across the terrace with his swinging 
gait the black skirts of the frock coat floating clear of his 
stout light grey legs. I confess to having looked upon these 
young people as the quarry of the {op"}heroic fugitive". I had the 
notion that they would not be allowed to escape capture. But 
of that I said nothing to Miss Haldin, only as she still 
remained uncommunicative I pressed her a little. 
   {op"}Well{ -- }but you can tell me at least your impression." 
   She turned her head to look at me and turned away again. 
   {op"}Impression," she repeated slowly, almost dreamily; then 
in a quicker tone: 
   {op"}He seems to be a man who has suffered more from his 
thoughts than from evil fortune." 
   {op"}From his thoughts, you say?" 
   {op"}And that is natural enough in a Russian," she took me up. 
{op"}In a young Russian; so many of them are unfit for action and 
yet unable to rest." 
   {op"}And you think he is that sort of man?" 
   {op"}No, I do not judge him. How could I, so suddenly. You 
asked for my impression{ -- }I explain my impression. I{ -- }I{ -- }don't know the world nor yet the people in it; I have been too 
solitary{ -- }I am too young to trust my own opinions." 
   {op"}Trust your instinct," I advised her. {op"}Most women trust 
.p334 
to that and make no worse mistakes than men. In this case you 
have your brother's letter to help you." 
   She drew a deep breath like a light sigh. 
   {op"}Unstained, lofty and solitary existences." she quoted as 
if to herself. But I caught the wistful murmur distinctly. 
   {op"}High praise," I whispered to her. 
   {op"}The highest possible." 
   {op"}So high that like the award 
.p335 
of happiness it is more fit to come only at the end of a life. 
But still no common or altogether unworthy personality could 
have suggested such a confident exaggeration of praise and . . ." 
   {op"}Ah! She interrupted me ardently. {op"}And if you had only
known the heart from which that judgment had come!" 
   She ceased on that note and for a space I reflected on 
the character of the words which I perceived very well must 
tip the scale of the girl's feelings in that young man's 
favour. They had not the sound of a casual utterance. Vague 
they were to my western mind and to my western sentiment but I 
could not forget that standing by Miss Haldin's side I was 
like a traveller in a strange country. 
It had also become clear to me that 
Miss Haldin was unwilling to enter into the details of the only 
material part of her visit to the Chateau Borel. But I was not 
hurt. Somehow I didn't feel it to be a want of confidence. 
It was some other difficulty{ -- }a difficulty I could not resent. 
And it was without the slightest resentment that I said: 
   {op"}Very well. But on that high ground which I will not 
dispute, you, like any one else in such circumstances, you must 
have made for yourself a representation of that exceptional 
friend, a mental image of him, and{ -- }please tell me{ -- }you were 
not disappointed?" 
.p336 
   {op"}What do you mean? His personal appearance." 
   {op"}I don't mean precisely his good looks or otherwise." 
   We turned at the end of the alley and made a few steps 
without looking at each other. 
   {op"}His appearance is not ordinary," said Miss Haldin at last. 
   {op"}No, I should have thought not{ -- }from the little you've 
said of your first impression. After all one has to fall back 
on that word. Impression! What I meant is that 
something indescribable which is likely to mark 
a {op"}not ordinary" person." 
   I perceived that she was not listening. There was no 
mistaking her expression; and once more I had the sense of 
being out of it{ -- }not because of my age which at any rate could 
draw inferences, but altogether out of it, on another plane 
whence I could only watch her from afar. And so ceasing to 
speak I watched her stepping out by my side. 
   {op"}No," she exclaimed suddenly, {op"}I could not have been 
disappointed with a man of such strong feeling." 
   {op"}Aha! Strong feeling," I muttered thinking to myself 
censoriously: like this{ -- }at once{ -- }all in a moment! 
   {op"}What did you say?" inquired Miss Haldin innocently. 
   {op"}No, nothing. I beg your pardon. Strong feeling. I am 
not surprised. 
.p337 
   {op"}And you don't know how abruptly I behaved to him" she 
cried remorsefully. 
   I suppose I must have appeared surprised, for, looking at 
me with a still more heightened colour, she said she was 
ashamed to admit that she had not been sufficiently collected; 
she had failed to control her words and actions as the 
situation demanded. She lost the fortitude worthy of 
both the men, the dead and the living; the fortitude which should have been 
the note of the meeting of Victor Haldin's sister with Victor 
Haldin's only known friend. He was looking at her keenly but said 
nothing, and she was{ -- }she confessed{ -- }painfully affected by his want of 
comprehension. All she could say was: {op"}You are Mr. Razumov." At 
this a slight frown passed over his forehead. After a short 
watchful pause he made a little bow of assent and waited. 
   At the thought that she had before her the man 
so highly regarded by her brother, the man who had known his 
value, spoken to him, understood him, had listened to his 
confidences, perhaps had encouraged him{ -- }her 
lips trembled, her eyes ran full of tears; 
she put out her hand, made a step towards him impulsively 
saying with an effort to restrain her emotion {op"}Can't you guess 
who I am?" He did not take the offered hand. 
.p338 
He even 
recoiled a pace and Miss Haldin imagined that he was 
unpleasantly affected. Miss Haldin excused him, directing her 
displeasure at herself. She had behaved unworthily like an 
emotional French girl. A manifestation of that kind 
could not be welcomed by a man of 
stern, self-contained character. 
   He must have been stern indeed, or perhaps very timid with 
women, not to respond in a more human way to the advances of 
a girl like Nathalia Haldin{ -- }I thought to myself. Those lofty 
and solitary existences (I remembered the words suddenly) make 
a young man shy and an old man savage{ -- }often. 
    {op"}Well," I encouraged Miss Haldin to proceed. 
   She was still very dissatisfied with herself. 
   {op"}I went from bad to worse," she said with an air of 
discouragement, very foreign to her. {op"}I did everything 
foolish except actually bursting into tears. I am thankful to say I 
did not do that. But I was unable to speak for quite a long time." 
   She had stood before him speechless swallowing her sobs, 
and when she managed at last to utter something it was only 
her brother's name{ -- }{op"}Victor{ -- }Victor Haldin" she gasped out, 
and again her voice failed her. 
.p339 
   {op"}Of course," she commented to me, {op"}this distressed him. 
He was quite overcome. 
I have told you my opinion that he is 
a man of deep feeling{ -- }it is impossible to doubt it. You 
should have seen his face. He positively reeled. He 
leaned against the wall of the terrace. Their 
friendship must have been a very brotherhood of souls! I 
was grateful to him for that emotion which made me feel less 
ashamed of my own lack of self-control. Of course I had 
regained the power of speech at once, almost. All this lasted 
not more than a few seconds: {op"}I am his sister," I said. {op"}Maybe 
you have heard of me." 
   {op"}And had he?" I interrupted. 
   {op"}I don't know. How could it have been otherwise? And 
yet . . . But what does that matter? I stood there before him, 
near enough to be touched and surely not looking like an 
impostor. All I know is that he put out both his hands then to me, 
I may say{ -- }flung them out at me with the greatest 
readiness and warmth and that I seized and pressed them, 
feeling that I was finding again a little of what I thought was 
lost to me for ever, with the loss of my brother{ -- }some of 
that hope, inspiration and support which I used to get from my 
dear dead. . . . 
.p340 
   I understood quite well what she meant. 
We 
strolled on slowly. I refrained from looking at her. 
And it was 
as if answering my own thoughts that I murmured: 
   {op"}No doubt, it was a great friendship{ -- }as you say. And 
that young man ended by welcoming your name so to speak with 
both hands. After that of course you would understand each 
other. Yes you would understand each other quickly." 
   It was a moment before I heard her voice. 
   {op"}Mr. Razumov seems to be a man of few words. A reserved 
man{ -- }even when he is strongly moved." 
   Unable to forget{ -- }or even forgive{ -- }the bass toned 
expansiveness of Peter Ivanovitch, the Arch-Patron of 
revolutionary parties, I said that I took that for a favourable trait of 
character. It was associated with sincerity{ -- }in my mind. 
   {op"}And, besides, we had not much time," she added. 
   {op"}No, you would not have of course." My suspicion and even 
dread of the feminist and his Egeria was so ineradicable that 
.p341 
I could not help asking with real anxiety which I made 
smiling. 
   {op"}But you escaped all right?" 
   She understood me and smiled too, at my uneasiness. 
   {op"}Oh! yes, I escaped if you like to call it that. I 
walked away quickly. There was no need to run. I am neither 
frightened nor yet{ -- }fascinated like that poor woman who 
received me so strangely." 
   {op"}And Mr.{ -- }Mr. Razumov!. . . . ." 
   {op"}He remained there of course. I suppose he went into the 
house after I left him. You remember that he came here 
strongly recommended to Peter Ivanovitch{ -- }possibly entrusted 
with important messages for him." 
   {op"}Ah! yes. Form that priest who. . . . ." 
   {op"}Father Zosim{ -- }yes. Or from others perhaps." 
   {op"}You left him, then. But have you seen him since, may I 
ask?" 
   For some time Miss Haldin made no answer to this very 
direct question then:{ -- }
   {op"}I have been expecting to see him here to-day" 
she said quietly. 
   {op"}You have! Do you meet then in this garden? In that case 
.p342 
I had better leave you at once." 
   {op"}No. Why leave me? And we don't meet in this garden. I 
have not seen Mr. Razumov since that first time. Not once. 
But I have been expecting him . . . . " 
   She paused. I wondered to myself why that young 
revolutionist should show so little alacrity. 
   {op"}Before we parted I told Mr. Razumov that I walked here 
for an hour every day at this time. I could not explain to 
him then why I did not ask him to come and see us at once. 
Mother must be prepared for such a visit. And then, you see, I do not know 
myself what Mr. Razumov has to tell us. He too must 
be told first how it is with poor mother. All these thoughts 
flashed through my mind at once. So I simply told him 
hurriedly that I was in the habit of walking here. . . .  This is a public place but there was a reason why I could not ask him to see 
us at home but that there are never many people about at 
this hour. I thought it would do very well. And it is so near 
.p343 
our apartments. I don't like to be very far away from mother. 
Our servant knows where I am in case I should be wanted 
suddenly." 
   {op"}Yes. It is very convenient from that point of view," 
I agreed. 
   In fact I thought the Bastions a very convenient place, 
since the girl did not think it prudent 
as yet to introduce that young man to her mother. It was here 
then, I thought looking round at that plot of ground of 
deplorable banality, that their acquaintance will begin and go 
on in the exchange of generous indignations and of extreme 
sentiments, too poignant perhaps for a non-Russian mind to conceive. 
I saw these two escaped out of four score of millions 
of human beings ground between the upper and nether millstone 
walking under these trees, their young heads close together. 
Yes, an excellent place to 
stroll and talk in. It even occurred to me while we turned 
once more away from the wide iron gates where the tram-cars 
stop, that when tired, they would have plenty of accomodation to rest themselves. There was a quantity of tables 
and chairs displayed between the restaurant cha{cr}let and the band-stand, 
a whole raft of painted deals spread out under the trees. In 
the very middle of it I observed a solitary Swiss couple whose fate 
was made secure from the cradle to the grave by the perfected 
.p344 
mechanism of democratic institutions in a republic that 
could almost be held in the palm of one's hand. The man, 
colourlessly uncouth was drinking beer out of a glittering 
glass, the woman, rustic and placid, leaning back in the rough chair gazed 
idly around. 
   There is little logic to be expected on this earth, not 
only in the matter of thought but also of sentiment. I was 
surprised to discover myself displeased with that unknown young 
man. A week had gone by since they met. Was callous, 
or shy, or very stupid? I could not make it out. 
   {op"}Do you think," I asked Miss Haldin after we had gone 
some distance up the great Alley, {op"}that Mr. Razumov understood 
your intention?" 
   {op"}Understood what I meant", she wondered. {op"}He was greatly 
moved. That I know! In my own agitation I could see it. But 
I spoke distinctly. He heard me; he seemed indeed to hang on 
my words. . . . . ." 
   Unconsciously she had hastened her pace. Her utterance 
too became quicker. 
.p345 
   I waited a little before I observed thoughtfully. 
   {op"}And yet he allowed all these days to pass." 
   {op"}How can we tell what work he may have to do here? He 
is not an idler travelling for his pleasure. His time may not 
be his own{ -- }nor yet his thoughts perhaps." 
   She slowed her pace suddenly and in a lowered voice, 
added:{ -- } 
   {op"}Or his very life"{ -- }then paused and stood still. {op"}For 
all I know he may have had to leave Geneva the very day he saw 
me." 
   {op"}Without telling you!" I exclaimed incredulously. 
   {op"}I did not give him time. I left him quite abruptly. I 
behaved emotionally to the end. I am sorry for it. Even if 
I had given him the opportunity he would have been justified 
in taking me for a person not to be trusted. 
An emotional tearful girl is not a person to confide in. 
But even if he has left Geneva for a time I am confident 
that we shall meet again." 
   {op"}Ah! you are confident. . . I dare say . . But on what ground?" 
   {op"}Because I've told him that I was in great need of someone, 
a fellow countryman, a fellow believer to whom I could give 
.p346 
my confidence in a certain matter." 
   {op"}I see. I don't ask you what answer he made. I confess 
that this is good ground for your belief in Mr. Razumov's 
appearance before long. But he has not turned up to-day." 
   {op"}No" she said quietly. {op"}Not to-day", and we stood for a 
time in silence like people that have nothing more to say to 
each other and let their thoughts run widely asunder before 
their bodies go off their different ways. Miss Haldin 
glanced at the watch on her wrist and made a brusque movement. 
She had already overstayed her time it seemed. 
   {op"}I don't like to be away from mother", she murmured 
shaking her head. {op"}It is not that she's so very ill now. But 
somehow when I am not with her I am 
more uneasy than ever." 
   Mrs. Haldin had 
not made the slightest allusion to her son for the last week 
or more. She sat as usual in the arm chair by the window looking out 
silently on that hopeless stretch of the Boulevard des 
Philosophes. When she spoke a few lifeless words it was of 
indifferent, trivial things. 
   {op"}For any one who knows what the poor soul is thinking 
of, that sort of talk is more painful than her silence. But 
that is bad too. I can hardly endure it and I dare not break 
it." 
.p347 
   Miss Haldin sighed refastening mechanically a button of her 
glove which had come undone. I knew well enough what a hard 
time of it she must be having. The stress, its causes, 
its nature, would have undermined the health of an occidental 
girl; but Russian natures have a singular power of resistance 
against the unfair strains of life. Straight and supple with 
a short jacket open on her black dress, which made her figure 
appear more slender and her fresh but colourless face more 
pale, she compelled my wonder and admiration. 
   {op"}I can't stay a moment longer. You ought to come soon 
to see mother. You know how she calls you: L'ami. It is an 
excellent name and she really means it. And now {it}Au revoir{ro}, 
I must run." 
   She glanced vaguely down the broad walk{ -- }the hand she 
put out to me eluded my grasp by an unexpected upward movement and 
rested upon my shoulder. Her red lips, the only 
bit of colour on her person were slightly parted, not in a 
smile however, but expressing a sort of startled pleasure. 
She gazed towards the gates and said quickly with a gasp 
{op"}There! I knew it. Here he comes." 
   I understood that she must mean Mr. Razumov. A young man 
was walking up the alley without haste. His clothes were some 
dull shade of brown and he carried a stick. When my eyes 
first fell on him his head was hanging on his breast as if in 
.p348 
deep thought. While I was looking at him he raised it sharply, 
saw us both in the distance and at once stopped. I am certain 
he did but that pause was nothing more perceptible than faltering 
a check in his gait, instantaneously overcome. Then he continued his 
approach looking at us steadily. Miss Haldin signed to me to 
remain and advanced a step or two to meet him. 
   I turned my head away from that meeting, and did not look 
at them again till I heard Miss Haldin's voice uttering his 
name in the way of introduction. Mr. Razumov was informed in 
a warm low tone that besides being a wonderful teacher I was a 
good man and an invaluable friend whose sympathy had been a 
great support {op"}in our sorrow and distress." 
   Of course I was described also as an Englishman. Miss 
Haldin spoke rapidly, faster than I have ever heard her speak, 
and that by contrast made the quietness of her eyes more 
expressive. 
   {op"}I have given him my confidence" she added, looking all the 
time at Mr. Razumov. That 
young man did indeed rest his gaze on Miss Haldin but certainly 
did not look into her eyes that were so ready for him. Afterwards he glanced backwards and forwards at us both, while the 
faint commencement of a forced smile followed by the suspicion 
.p349 
of a frown vanished one after another: I detected them, 
though neither could have been noticed by a person less intensely 
bent upon divining him, than myself. I don't know what 
Natalia Haldin had observed, but my attention seized the 
very shades of these movements. The attempted smile was given 
up, the incipient frown was checked, and smoothed so that 
there should be no sign; but I imagined him exclaiming inwardly: 
   {op"}Her confidence! To this elderly person{ -- }this foreigner!" 
   I imagined this because he looked foreign enough to me. I 
was upon the whole favourably impressed. He had an air of 
intelligence and even some distinction quite above the average 
of the students and other inhabitants of the {it}Petite Russie{ro}. His 
features were more decided than in the generality of Russian 
faces: he had a line of the jaw, a clean shaven sallow cheek; his 
nose was a ridge and not a mere protuberance. His hat was well 
down over his eyes, his dark hair curled low on the nape of his 
neck; in the ill-fitting brown clothes there were sturdy 
limbs; a slight stoop brought out a satisfactory breadth of 
shoulders. Upon the whole I was not disappointed. Studious. . . 
Robust. . . .  Shy. . . . 
   Before Miss Haldin had ceased speaking I felt the grip of 
his hand on mine a muscular firm grip but unexpectedly hot and 
dry. Not a word or even a mutter assisted this short and 
.p350 
arid handshake. 
   I intended to leave them to themselves but Miss 
Haldin touched me lightly on the 
forearm with a significant contact conveying a distinct wish. 
Let him smile who likes but I was only too ready to stay near 
Natalia Haldin, and I am not ashamed to say that it was no 
smiling matter to me. I stayed not as a youth would have 
stayed uplifted as it were poised in the air of exultation, 
but soberly, with my feet on the ground and my mind trying to 
penetrate her intention. She had turned to Mr. Razumov. 
   {op"}Well. This is the place. Yes it is here that I meant 
you to come. I have been walking every day. . . . .  Don't excuse 
yourself{ -- }I understand. I am grateful to you for coming here 
but all the same I cannot stay now. It is impossible. I must 
hurry off home. Yes even with you standing before me, I must 
run off. I have been too long away. . . . .  You know how it is?" 
   These last words were addressed to me. I noticed that 
Mr. Razumov passed the tip of his tongue over his lips just as 
a parched, feverish man might do. He took her hand 
in its black glove which closed on his and held it{ -- }detained 
it quite visibly to me against a drawing back movement. 
   {op"}Thank you once more for{ -- }for understanding me" she 
went on warmly. He interrupted her with a certain effect of 
roughness. I didn't like him speaking to this frank creature 
.p351 
so much from under the brim of his hat as it were. And he 
produced a faint rasping voice quite like a man with a parched 
throat. 
   {op"}What is there to thank me for? Understand you?. . . . . 
How did I understand you. . . . . .  You had better know that I 
understand nothing. I was aware that you wanted to see me in 
this garden; I could not come before. I was hindered. And 
even to-day you see. . . . late." 
   She still held his hand. 
   {op"}I can at any rate thank you for not dismissing me from 
your mind as a weak, emotional girl. No doubt I want sustaining. 
I am very ignorant. But I can be trusted. Indeed I can." 
   {op"}You are ignorant" he repeated thoughtfully. He had 
raised his head and was looking straight into her face now while 
she held his hand. They stood like this for a long moment. She 
released his hand. 
   {op"}Yes. You did come late. It was good of you to come on 
the chance of me having loitered beyond my time. I was talking 
with this good friend here. I was talking of you. Yes, 
Kirylo Sidorovitch, of you. He was with me when I first heard 
of your being here in Geneva. He can tell you what comfort it was 
to my bewildered spirit to hear that news. He knew I meant 
to seek you out. It was the only object of my accepting the 
.p352 
invitation of Peter Ivanovitch. . . . . ." 
   {op"}Peter Ivanovitch talked to you of me", he interrupted 
in that wavering hoarse voice which suggested a horribly 
dry throat. 
   {op"}Very little. Just told me your name and that you had 
arrived here. Why should I have asked for more. What could 
he have told me that I did not know already from 
my brother's letter. Three lines! And how much they 
meant to me! I will show them to you one day Kiryto Sidorovitch. 
But now I must go. The first talk between us can not 
be a matter of five minutes so we had better not begin. . . . ." 
   I had been standing a little aside seeing them both in 
profile. At that moment it occurred to me that 
Mr. Razumov's face was older than his age. 
   {op"}If Mother"{ -- }the girl had turned suddenly to me{ -- }{op"}were to 
wake up in my absence (so much longer than usual) she would perhaps question 
me. She seems to miss me more, you know, of late. She would 
want to know what delayed me{ -- }and, you see, it would be painful 
for me to dissemble before her." 
   I understood the point very well. For the same reason she 
checked what seemed to be on Mr. Razumov's part a movement to 
accompany her. 
   {op"}No! No! I go alone, but meet me here as soon as 
possible." Then to me in a lower significant tone: 
.p353 
   {op"}Mother may be sitting at the window at this moment 
looking down the street. She must not know anything of Mr. 
Razumov's presence here till{ -- }till something is arranged." 
She paused before she added a little louder but still speaking 
to me, {op"}Mr. Razumov does not quite understand my difficulty 
but you know what it is." 
.p353 
{cn}V 
{cop}With a quick inclination of her head for us both and an 
earnest friendly glance at the young man Miss Haldin left us covering 
our heads and looking after her straight supple figure going 
away rapidly. Her walk was not that hybrid and uncertain 
gliding some women affect but a frank strong healthy movement 
forward. Rapidly she increased the distance{ -- }disappeared 
with suddenness at last, I discovered only then that Mr. Razumov, 
after ramming his hat well over his brow, was looking me over from head to 
foot. I daresay I was a very unexpected fact 
for that young Russian refugee to stumble upon. 
I caught in his physiognomy, in his whole bearing an 
expression compounded of curiosity and scorn tempered 
by alarm{ -- }as though he had been holding his breath while I 
was not looking. But his eyes meet mine with a gaze direct 
enough. I saw then for the first time that they were of a clear 
.p354 
brown colour, fringed with thick black eyelashes. They were the 
youngest feature of his face. Not at all unpleasant eyes. 
He swayed slightly, leaning on his stick and generally hung in 
the wind. It flashed upon me that in leaving us thus together 
Miss Haldin had an intention{ -- }that something was entrusted to 
me since by a strange accident I had found myself in the way. 
On this assumed ground I put all possible friendliness into my 
manner. 
Swiftly 
I cast about for some right thing to say and suddenly in Miss 
Haldin's last words I perceived the clue to the nature of my 
mission. 
   {op"}No," I said gravely if with 
.p355 
a smile {op"}You can not be expected to understand." 
   His clean-shaven lip quivered ever so little before he said 
as if wickedly amused: 
   {op"}But haven't you heard just now? I was thanked by that 
young lady for understanding so well?" 
   I looked at him rather hard. Was there a hidden and 
inexplicable sneer in this retort? No. It was not that. It 
might have been resentment. Yes. But what had he to resent? 
He looked as though he had not slept very well 
of late I could almost feel on me the weight of his unrefreshed 
motionless stare, the stare of a man who lies unwinking in the 
dark, angrily passive in the toils of disastrous thoughts. Now, 
.p356 
when I know how true it was, I can honestly affirm that this{it}was{ro} 
the effect he produced on me. It was painful in a curiously 
indefinite way{ -- }for of course the definition comes to me now 
while I sit writing in the fullness of my knowledge. But that 
is what the effect was at that time of absolute ignorance. This 
new sort of uneasiness which he seemed to be forcing upon me 
I attempted to put down by assuming a conversational, easy 
familiarity. 
   {op"}That extremely charming and essentially admirable young 
girl (I am{ -- }as you see{ -- }old enough to be frank in my 
expressions) was referring to her own feelings. Surely you must have 
understood that much." 
.p357 
   He made such a brusque movement that he even tottered a 
little. 
   {op"}Must understand this! Not expected to understand that. 
I may have other things to do. And the girl is charming and 
admirable. Well{ -- }and if she is! I suppose I can see that 
for myself." 
   This sally would have been insulting if his voice had not 
been practically extinct, dried up in his throat; and the 
rustling effort of his speech too pathetic in its sincerity 
to give real offence. 
   I remained silent checked between the obvious fact and the 
subtle impression. It was open to me to leave him there and 
then; but the sense ofhaving been entrusted with a mission, 
.p358 
the suggestion of Miss Haldin's last glance, was strong upon 
me. After a moment of reflection I said: 
   {op"}Shall we walk together a little?" 
   He shrugged his shoulders so violently that he tottered 
again. I saw it out of the corner of my eye as I moved on, 
with him at my elbow. He had fallen back a little and was 
practically out of my sight unless I turned my head to look 
at him. I did not wish to indispose him still further by 
an appearance of marked curiosity. It might have been distasteful to 
such a young and secret refugee from under the pestilential 
shadow hiding the true, kindly face of his land. And the 
shadow, the attendant of his countrymen stretching across the 
middle Europe was lying on him too, darkening his figure to 
.p359 
my mental vision. {op"}Without doubt{ -- }I said to myself listening 
to his heavy unsteady footsteps{ -- }{op"}he seems a sombre, even 
a desperate revolutionist; but he is young, he may be unselfish 
and humane, capable of compassion, of . . . . . . ." 
   I heard him clear 
gratingly, his parched throat, and became all attention. 
   {op"}This is beyond everything" were his first words. 
{op"}It is beyond everything! I 
find you here for no reason that I can understand in possession 
of something I can not be expected to understand! A confident! 
A foreigner! Talking about an admirable Russian girl. Is the 
admirable girl a fool I begin to wonder. What are you at? What 
.p360 
is your object?" 
   He was barely audible as if his throat had no more 
resonnance than a dry rag, a piece of tinder. It was so 
pitiful that I found it extremely easy to control my indignation. 
   {op"}When you have lived a little longer Mr. Razumov you will 
discover that no woman is an absolute fool. I am not a 
feminist like that illustrious author peter Ivanovitch, who 
to say the truth is not a little suspect to me. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   He interrupted me in a surprising note of whispering 
astonishment. 
   {op"}Suspect to you! Peter Ivanovitch suspect to you! To 
you! . . . . ." 
   {op"}Yes in a certain aspect he is" I said dismissing my 
.p361 
remark lightly. {op"}As I was saying Mr. Razumov, when you have
lived long enough you will learn to discriminate between the 
noble trustfulness of a nature foreign to every meanness and 
the flattered credulity of some women; though even these last 
silly as they may be, unhappy as they are sure to be are never 
absolute fools. It is my belief that no woman is ever 
completely deceived. Those that are lost leap into the abyss with 
their eyes open, if all the truth were known." 
   {op"}Upon my word" he cried at my elbow, {op"}What is it to me 
whether women are fools or lunatics. I really don't care what 
you think of them. I{ -- }I am not interested in them. I let 
them be. I am not a young man in a novel. How do you know 
that I want to learn anything about women . . . . .  What is the meaning 
.p362 
of all this?" 
   {op"}The object, you mean, of this conversation which I 
admit, I have forced upon you in a measure." 
   {op"}Forced! Object!" he repeated still keeping half a pace 
or so behind me. {op"}You wanted to talk about women apparently. 
That's a subject. But I don't care for it. I have never. . . . 
In fact I have had other subjects to think about." 
   {op"}I am concerned here with one woman only. A young girl. 
The sister of your dead friend. Miss Haldin. Surely you can 
think a little of her. What I meant from the first was that 
there is a situation which you can not be expected to understand." 
   I listened to his unsteady footfalls by my side for the 
space of several strides. 
.p363 
   {op"}I think that it will prepare the ground for your next 
interview with Miss Haldin if I tell you of it. I imagine 
that she might have had something of the kind in her mind when 
she left us together. I believe myself authorised to speak. 
The peculiar situation I have alluded to has arisen in the 
first grief and distress of Victor Haldin's execution. There 
was something peculiar in the circumstances of his arrest. You 
no doubt know the whole truth. . . . ." 
   I felt my arm seized above the elbow and next instant 
found myself swung so as to face Mr. Razumov. 
   {op"}You spring up from the ground before me with this talk. 
Who the devil are you. This is not to be borne. Why? What 
for? What do you know of what is or is not peculiar? What 
.p364 
have you to do with any confounded, circumstances or with 
anything that happens in Russia anyway?" 
   He leaned on his stick with his other hand, heavily; and 
when he let go my arm I was certain in my mind that he was 
hardly able to keep on his feet. 
   {op"}Let us sit down at one of these vacant tables," I 
proposed disregarding this display of unexpectedly profound 
emotion. It was not without its effect on me, I confess. I 
was sorry for him. 
   {op"}What tables? What are you talking about? Oh{ -- }the empty 
tables? The tables there. Certainly. I will sit at one of the 
empty tables." 
   I led him away from the path to the very centre of the raft 
.p365 
of deals before the Chalet. The Swiss couple were gone by 
that time. We were alone on the raft so to speak. Mr. 
Razumov dropped into a chair, let fall his stick and propped 
on his elbows, his head between his hands, stared at me 
persistently, openly and continuously while I signalled the 
waiter and ordered some beer. I could not quarrel with this 
silent inspection very well because, truth to tell I felt 
somewhat guilty of having been sprung on him with some 
abruptness{ -- }of having {op"}sprung from the ground" as he expressed 
it. 
   While waiting to be served I mentioned that born from 
parents settled in St. Petersburg I had acquired the language 
as a child. The town I did not remember having left it for 
.p366 
good as a boy of nine, but in later years renewed my 
acquaintance with the language. He listened, intent, without 
as much as moving his eyes the least bit. He had to 
change his position when the beer came, and the instant 
draining of his glass revived him. He leaned back in the chair and 
folding his arms across his chest continued to stare at me 
squarely. It occurred to me that his clean shaved almost 
swarthy face was really of the very mobile sort, and that the 
absolute stillness of it was the acquired habit of a 
revolutionist, of a conspirator everlastingly on his guard against self-
betrayal in a world of secret spies. 
   {op"}But you are an Englishman{ -- }a teacher of English 
literature," he murmured in a voice that was no longer issuing from 
.p367 
a parched throat. {op"}I have heard of you. People told me 
you have lived here for years." 
   {op"}Quite true. More than twenty years. And I have been 
assisting Miss Haldin with her English studies." 
   {op"}You have been reading English poetry with her", he 
said, immovable now, like another man altogether, a complete 
.p368 
stranger to the man of the heavy and uncertain footfalls a 
little while ago{ -- }at my elbow. 
   {op"}Yes English poetry" I said. {op"}But the trouble of which I speak was caused 
by an English newspaper. . ." 
   He continued to stare at me.       
I don't think he knew 
before that the story of the midnight arrest had been ferreted 
out by an English journalist, and given to the world. When  I explained this to him
he muttered contemptuously: {op"}It 
may have been altogether a lie." 
   {op"}I should think you are the best judge of that" I retorted 
a little disconcerted. {op"}I must confess that to me 
it looks to be true in the main." 
.p369 
   {op"}How can you tell truth from lies" he queried in his new, 
immovable manner. 
   {op"}I don't know how you do it in Russia" I began rather 
nettled by his attitude. He interrupted me. 
   {op"}In Russia and in general everywhere{ -- }in a newspaper for 
instance. The colour of the ink and the shapes of the letters 
are the same." 
   {op"}Well. There are other trifles one can go by. The 
character of the publication, the general verisimilitude of the 
news, the consideration of the motive, and so on. I don't 
trust blindly the accuracy of special correspondents{ -- }but why should this one have gone to the trouble of concocting a 
circumstantial falsehood on a matter of no importance to the 
.p370 
world?" 
   {op"}That's what it is" he grumbled. {op"}What's going on with 
us is of no importance{ -- }a mere sensational story 
to amuse the readers of the papers{ -- }the superior 
contemptuous Europe. It is hateful to think of. But let them 
wait a bit. . ." 
   He broke off on this sort of threat addressed to the 
western world. 
Disregarding the anger in his 
stare I pointed out that whether the journalist was 
well or ill informed, the concern of the friends of these 
ladies was with the effect the few lines of print in question 
had produced{ -- }the effect alone. And surely he must be counted 
.p371 
as one of the friends{ -- }if only for the sake of his late comrade and 
intimate fellow revolutionist. At that point, I thought he 
was going to speak vehemently; but he only astounded me 
by the convulsive start of his whole body. 
He restrained himself, folded his loosened arms tighter across his chest 
and sat back with a smile in which there was a twitch of 
scorn and malice. 
   {op"}Yes, a comrade and an intimate . . .  Very well." 
   {op"}I ventured to speak to you on that 
assumption. And I can not be mistaken. I was present when Peter 
Ivanovitch announced your arrival here to Miss Haldin and I saw 
her relief and thankfulness. When your name was mentioned. Afterwards she showed 
.p372 
me her brother's letter and read out the few words in which he 
alludes to you. What else but a friend could you have been?" 
   {op"}Obviously. That's perfectly well known. A friend. 
Quite correct. . . .  Go on. You were talking of some effect." 
   I said to myself: He puts on the callousness of a stern 
revolutionist, the insensibility to common emotions of a man 
devoted to a destructive idea. He is young and his sincerity 
assumes a pose before a stranger, a foreigner, an old man. Youth 
must assert itself. . . .  As concisely as possible I exposed to 
him the state of mind poor Mrs. Haldin had been thrown into 
by the news of her son's untimely end. 
   He listened{ -- }I felt it{ -- }with profound attention. His 
level stare deflected gradually downwards left my face and 
.p373 
rested at last on the ground at his feet. 
   {op"}You can enter into the daughter's feelings. As you said 
I have only read a little English poetry with her and I won't 
make myself ridiculous in your eyes by trying to speak of her. 
But you have seen her. She is one of these rare human beings 
that do not want explaining. At least I think so. 
I am speaking now 
as a foreigner. But look at these ladies' retired life in the 
country, the estrangement from their connections and even from 
their class brought about, I understand, by their liberal opinions. 
They had only that son, that brother for a link with the wider word,
with the future. The very groundwork of 
.p374 
active existence for Natalia Haldin is gone with him. Can 
you wonder then that she turns with eagerness to the only man 
her brother mentions in his letters. Your name is a sort of legacy. 
   {op"}What could he have written of me" he cried in a low 
exasperated tone. 
   {op"}Only a few words. It is not for me to repeat them to 
you Mr. Razumov; but 
you may believe my assertion that these words are forcible 
enough to make both his mother and his sister believe 
implicitly in the worth of your judgment and in the truth of anything 
you may have to say to them. It's impossible for you now to 
pass them by like strangers." 
.p375 
   I paused and for a moment sat listening to the footsteps 
of the few people passing up and down the broad central walk. While
I was speaking his head had sunk upon his breast above his folded 
arms. He raised it sharply. 
   {op"}Must I go then and lie to that old woman!" 
   It was not anger; it was something else, 
something more poignant and not so simple. I 
was aware of it sympathetically, 
while I was profoundly concerned at the nature of that 
exclamation. 
   {op"}Dear me! Won't the truth do then? I hoped you could 
.p376 
have told them something consoling. I am 
thinking of the poor mother now. . .  Your Russia {it}is{ro} a cruel 
country." 
   He moved a little in his chair. 
   {op"}Yes" I repeated. {op"}I thought you would have had something 
authentic to tell." 
   The twitching of his lips before he spoke was curious{ -- }
   {op"}What if it is not worth telling"? 
   {op"}Not worth. . .  from what point of view? I don't 
understand . . ." 
   {op"}From every point of view." 
   I spoke with some asperity. 
.p377 
   {op"}I should think that anything which could explain the 
the circumstances of that midnight arrest. . ." 
   {op"}Reported by a journalist for the amusement of the 
civilised Europe" he broke in scornfully. 
   {op"}Yes, reported...  But aren't they true?. . .  I can't make 
out your attitude in this? Either the man 
is a hero to you or . . ." 
   He approached his face with fiercely distended nostrils 
close to mine so suddenly that I had the greatest difficulty 
in not starting back. 
   {op"}You ask me! I suppose it amuses you, all this. 
Look here! I am a worker! I studied. Yes, I studied very 
hard. There is intelligence here . . .  (He tapped his forehead 
.p378 
with his finger-tips). Don't you think a Russian may have 
sane ambitions? Yes{ -- }I had even prospects. Certainly! I had. 
And now you see me here, abroad, everything gone, lost, 
sacrificed. You see me here{ -- }and you ask! You see me, don't you{ -- }sitting before you." 
   He threw himself back violently. I kept outwardly calm. 
   {op"}Yes, I see you here; and, I assume, you are here on account of the Haldin 
affair?" 
   His manner changed. 
   {op"}You call it the Haldin affair{ -- }do you? He observed indifferently. 
   {op"}I have no right 
to ask you anything." I said {op"} I wouldn't presume. But in that case 
.p379 
the mother and the sister of him who must be a hero in your 
eyes can not be indifferent to you. The girl is a frank and 
generous creature having the noblest{ -- }well{ -- }illusions. You 
will tell her nothing{ -- }or you will tell her nothing. But 
speaking now of the object with which I've approached you:
first we have to deal with the morbid state of the 
mother. Perhaps something could be invented 
under your authority, as a cure for a distracted 
and suffering soul of maternal affection." 
   His air of weary indifference was accentuated, I could 
not help thinking, wilfully. 
   {op"}Oh, yes. Something might . . ." 
   He put his hand over his mouth as if to conceal a 
.p380 
yawn. When he uncovered his lips they were smiling faintly. 
   {op"}Pardon me. This has been a long conversation and I have 
not had much sleep the last two nights." 
   This unexpected, somewhat insolent, sort of apology had 
the merit of being perfectly true. He had had no nightly rest 
to speak of since that day when, in the grounds of the Chateau 
Borel, the sister of Victor Haldin had appeared before him. 
The perplexities and the complex terrors{ -- }I may say{ -- }of this
sleeplessness are recorded in the document I was to see later{ -- }the 
document which is the main source of this narrative. And at 
the moment he looked to me convincingly tired in his assumed 
nonchalance, gone slack all over like a man who has passed 
through some sort of crisis. 
.p381 
   {op"}I have had a lot of urgent writing to do" he added in a 
careless mutter. 
   I rose from my chair at once and he followed my example 
without haste, a little heavily. 
   {op"}I must apologise for detaining you so long" I said. 
   {op"}Why apologise? One can't very well go to bed before night. 
And you did not detain me. I could have left you at any time." 
   I had not stayed with him to be offended. 
   {op"}I am glad you have been sufficiently interested" I said 
calmly. {op"}No merit of mine though{ -- }the commonest sort of 
regard for the mother of your friend was enough . . .  As to Miss 
Haldin herself she, at one time was disposed to think that her 
brother had been betrayed to the police in some way." 
.p382 
   To my great surprise Mr. Razumor sat down again suddenly. 
I stared at him and I must say that he returned my stare 
without winking for quite a considerable time. 
   {op"}In some way" he mumbled as if he had not understood or 
could not believe his ears. 
   {op"}Some unforeseen event, a sheer accident might have done 
that" I went on. {op"}Or, as she characteristically put it to me, 
the folly or weakness of some unhappy fellow revolutionist." 
   {op"}Folly or weakness" he repeated bitterly. 
   {op"}She is a very generous creature" I observed after a time. 
The man admired by Victor Haldin fixed his eyes on the ground, 
seemed oblivious of my existence. I turned away and moved off 
apparently unnoticed by him. I nourished no resentment of the 
.p383 
moody brusqueness with which he had treated me. The sentiment 
I was carrying away from that conversation was that of 
hopelessness. Before I had got fairly clear of the raft of chairs 
and tables he had rejoined me. 
   {op"}H'm yes" I heard him at my elbow again. {op"}But what do
you think?" 
   I did not look round even. 
   {op"}I think that you people are under a curse." 
   He made no sound. It was only on the pavement outside 
the gate that I heard him again. 
   {op"}I should like to walk with you a little." 
   After all I preferred this unknown young man to his 
celebrated compatriot the Great Peter Ivanovitch. His inigmatic 
.p384 
brusqueness had not irritated me so much as it might have done 
if I had not adopted a special view of him. But I saw no 
reason for being particularly gracious. 
   {op"}I am going now to the railway station by the shortest 
way from here to meet a friend from England" I said for all 
answer to his unexpected proposal. I still hoped that 
something informing could come of it. As we stood on the 
curbstone waiting for a tramcar to pass he remarked gloomily {op"}I 
like what you said just now." 
   {op"}Do you?" 
   We stepped off the pavement together. 
   {op"}The great problem" he went on {op"}is to understand 
thoroughly the nature of the curse. 
.p385 
   {op"}That's not very difficult I think." 
   {op"}I think so too" he agreed with me, and his readiness, 
strangely enough, did not make him less enigmatical in the 
least. 
   {op"}A curse is an evil spell" I tried him again. {op"}And the 
important, the great problem, is to find the means to break 
it." 
   {op"}Yes. To find the means." 
   That was also an assent, but he seemed to be thinking of 
something else. We had crossed diagonally the open space 
before the theatre and began to descend a broad, sparsely 
frequented street in the direction of one of the smaller 
bridges. He kept on by my side without speaking for a long time. 
.p386 
   {op"}You are not thinking of leaving Geneva soon" I asked. 
   He was silent for so long that I began to think I had 
been indiscreet and should get no answer at all. Yet on 
looking at him I almost believed that my question had caused him 
something in the nature of positive anguish. I detected it 
mainly in the clasping of his hands in which he put a great 
force stealthily. Once however he had overcome that sort of 
agonising hesitation sufficiently to inform that he had no 
such intention, he became rather communicative{ -- }at least 
relatively to the former offhand curtness of his speeches. The 
tone too was more amiable. All it amounted to was that he 
intended to study and also to write. He went even so far as to 
tell me he had been to Stuttgard. Stuttgard I was aware was 
.p387 
one of the revolutionary centres. The directing committee of 
one of the Russian parties (I can't tell now which) was located 
in that town. It was there that he got into touch with the 
active work of the revolutionists outside Russia. 
   {op"}I had never been abroad before" he explained in a rather 
inanimate voice now. Then, after a slight hesitation, 
altogether different from the agonising irresolution my first 
simple question (whether he meant to stay in Geneva) had aroused, 
he made me an unexpected confidence. 
   {op"}The fact is I have received a sort of mission from them." 
   {op"}Which will keep you here in Geneva?" 
   {op"}Yes. Here. In this odious . . . ." 
   I was satisfied with my faculty for putting two and two 
.p388 
together when I drew the inference that the mission had 
something to do with the person of the great Peter Ivanovitch. 
But I kept that surmise to myself naturally and Mr. Razumor 
said nothing more for some considerable time. It was only 
when we were nearly on the bridge we had been making for that 
he opened his lips again, abruptly. 
   {op"}Could I see that precious article anywhere?" 
   I had to think for a moment before I saw what he was 
referring to. 
   {op"}It has been reproduced in parts by the press here. There 
are files to be seen in various places. My copy of the English 
newspaper I have left with Miss Haldin, I remember on the very 
day{ -- }or the day it reached me. I was sufficiently worried by 
.p389 
seeing it lying on a table by the side of the poor mother's 
chair for weeks. Then it disappeared. It was a relief I 
assure you." 
   He had stopped short. 
   {op"}I trust"I continued, {op"}that you will find time to see 
these ladies fairly often{ -- }that you will make time." 
   He stared at me so queerly that I hardly know how to 
define his aspect. I could not understand it in this connection 
at all. What ailed him{ -- }I asked myself. What strange thought 
had come into his head? What vision of all the horrors that 
can be seen in his hopeless country, had come suddenly to haunt 
his brain? If it were anything connected with the fate of 
Victor Haldin, then I hoped earnestly he would keep it to 
.p390 
himself for ever. I was, to speak plainly, so shocked that I 
tried to conceal my impression by{ -- }Heaven forgive me{ -- }a 
smile and the assumption of a light manner. 
   {op"}Surely" I exclaimed {op"}that needn't cost you a great 
effort." 
   He turned away from me and leaned over the parapet of 
the bridge. For a moment I waited looking at his back. And 
yet I assure you I was not anxious just then to look at his 
face again. He did not move at all. He did not mean to move. 
I walked on slowly, on my way towards the station. At the end 
of the bridge I glanced back though. I could not refrain. 
No. He had not moved. He hung well over the parapet as if 
captivated by the smooth rush of the blue water under the arch. 
.p391 
The current there is swift, extremely swift indeed. It makes 
some people dizzy. I myself can never look at it for any 
length of time without experiencing a dread of being suddenly snatched away by 
its destructive force. Some brains can not resist the suggestion 
of irresistible power and of headlong motion. 
   It apparently had a charm for Mr Razumov. 
I left him hanging far over the parapet
of the bridge. The way he had behaved 
to me could not be put down to mere boorishness. 
There was something 
else under his scorn and 
impatience with glimpses of fear 
and almost of despair. Perhaps, I 
thought, with sudden approach to 
hidden truth; it was the same thing 
which had kept him over a week, 
nearly ten days indeed, from coming near 
Miss Haldin. But what it was I could 
not tell. Though he leaned 
dangerously far over the parapet he had not the aspect of a man 
unduly fascinated by the suggestion of the running water.
.p392
{pt}Part III
{cn}I
{cop}The water under the bridge ran violent and profound. Its
slightly undulating rush seemed capable
of scouring out a channel for itself through solid
granite while you looked. But if it had flowed through Razumor's breast it
could not have washed away the accumulated bitterness the wrecking of his
life had deposited there. 
   {op"}What is the meaning of all this" he thought staring
downwards at the headlong river flowing so smooth and clean that
only the passage of a faint air bubble or, a thin vanishing
streak of foam like a white hair, disclosed its vertiginous
rapidity, its terrible force. {op"}Why has that meddlesome old
.p393
Englishman blundered against me? And what is his silly tale
of a crazy old woman?" 
   He was trying to think brutally on purpose but he avoided
any mental reference to the young girl. {op"}A crazy old woman"
he repeated to himself. It is a fatality. Or ought I to
despise all this as an absurdity. But no! I am wrong. I
can afford to despise nothing. An absurdity may be the
starting point of the most dangerous complications. How is one to
guard against it. It puts to rout one's intelligence. The
more intelligent one is the less one suspects an absurdity. 
   A wave of wrath choked his thoughts for a moment. It
even made his body leaning over the parapet quiver, then he
resumed his silent thinking, like a secret dialogue with
.p394
himself. And even in that privacy his thought had some
reservations of which he was vaguely conscious. 
   After all this is not absurd perhaps. It is
insignificant. It is absolutely insignificant. Absolutely. The
craze of an old woman{ -- }the fussy officiousness of a blundering
elderly Englishman. What devil put him in the way ...  Haven't
I treated him cavalierly enough. No! Haven't I just? That's
the way to treat these meddlesome persons. Is it possible that
he still stand behind my back, waiting? 
   Razumor felt a faint chill run down his back. It was not
fear. He was certain that it was not fear{ -- }not fear for
himself{ -- }but it was all the same a sort of apprehension as if
for another personality, for someone he knew without being
.p395
able to put a name on the personality. But the recollection
that the officious Englishman had a train to meet tranquilised
him for a time. It was too stupid to suppose that he should
be standing behind his back{ -- }waiting. It was unnecessary to
look round and make sure. 
   {op"}But what did he mean by his extraordinary rigmarole about
the newspaper and that crazy old woman{ -- }he thought suddenly.
It was a damnable presumption anyhow, something that only an
Englishman could be capable of. All that was a sort of sport
for him{ -- }the sport of revolution{ -- }a game to look at from the
height of his superiority. And what on earth did he mean by
his exclamation {op"}Won't the truth do!" 
   Razumor pressed his folded arms to the stone coping over
.p396
which he was leaning with force. Won't the truth do? The
truth for the crazy old mother of the.... " 
   The young man shuddered again. Yes. The truth would do.
Apparently it would do. Exactly. And receive thanks" he thought formulating the
unspoken words cynically. {op"}Fall on my neck in gratitude no doubt"
he jeered mentally. But this mood abandoned him at once. He
felt sad as if his heart had become empty suddenly. {op"}Well{ -- }
I must be cautious" he concluded coming to himself as though
his brain had been awakened from a trance. {op"}There is nothing,
no one too insignificant, too absurd to be disregarded" he
thought wearily. {op"}I must be cautious." 
   Razumov pushed himself with his hands away from the
balustrade and retraceing his steps along the bridge went straight
.p397
to his lodgings where for a few days he led a solitary
and retired existence. He neglected
Peter Ivanovitch to whom he was accredited by
the Stuttgard group; he never went near the refugee
revolutionists to whom he had been introduced on his
arrival. He kept out of that world altogether. And
he felt that such conduct causing surprise and
arousing suspicion contained an element of danger
for himself.
   This is not to say that during these few days he never
went out. I met him several times in the streets but
he gave me no recognition. Once going home
after an evening call on the ladies Haldin I thought I recognised
him crossing the dark roadway of the Boulevard des
Philosophes. The figure had a broadbrimmed soft hat and the
collar of his coat turned up. I watched him make straight for
the house but instead of going in the man,
whoever he was, stopped opposite the still lighted
windows and after a time went away down a side street.
   I knew that he had not been to see Mrs Haldin yet. Miss
Haldin told me he was reluctant; moreover the mental
condition of Mrs Haldin had changed. She seemed to think
now that her son was living and perhaps awaited his
arrival. Her immobility in the great armchair in front
of the window had an air of expectancy even when the blind was down
and the lamps lighted.
   For my part I was convinced she had received her death-
stroke; Miss Haldin, to whom of course I said nothing of
my forebodings, thought that no good would come from
introducing Mr Razumov just then, an opinion which I shared
fully. I knew that she met the young on the Bastions.
Once or twice I saw them strolling
slowly up the main alley. Perhaps they met
.p398
every day. I don't know. I avoided passing that
way during the hour when Miss Haldin
took her exercise there. One day however in a
fit of absent mindedness I passed through the gates
and came upon her walking alone{ -- }I stopped
to exchange a few words. Mr Razumov failed
to turn up and, moving
slowly up we began to talk about him{ -- }naturally.
   {---}{op"}Did he tell you anything definite about your brother
activities{ -- }his end?" I ventured to ask.
   {---}{op"}No" admitted Miss Haldin with some hesitation.
   {op"}Nothing definite". But I understood well
enough that all their conversations must have been
referred mentally to that dead man who
had brought them together. That was unavoidable
But it was in the living man that she was interested.
That was unavoidable too I suppose. And
as I pushed in my inquiries I
discovered that he had disclosed himself to her as
a, by no means, conventional revolutionist,
contemptuous of watch-words, of theories, of men
too. I was rather pleased at that{ -- }but I was
a little puzzled.
   {---}{op"}His mind goes forward, far ahead of
the struggle" Miss Haldin explained. Of
course he is an actual worker too" she added.
   {---}{op"}And do you understand him? I inquired
point blank.
   She hesitated again. {op"}Not altogether"
she murmured. I perceived that he had
fascinated her by an assumption of 
.p399
an enigmatical superiority.
   {---}{op"}Do you know what I think?" she
went on, breaking through her 
reserved, almost reluctant
attitude. {op"}I think that he is
observing, studying me, to discover whether
I am worthy of his trust{---}" 
   {op"}And that pleases you?"
   She kept mysteriously silent for
a moment. Then with energy but in a
confidential tone{ -- }{op"}I am convinced" she declared, {op"}that this
extraordinary man is meditating
some vast plan, some great undertaking
he is possessed by it{ -- }he suffers from
it . . . and from being alone in the world.
   {---}{op"}And so he's looking for helpers I
commented turning away my head.
   Again there was a silence.
   {---}{op"}Why not?" she said at last.
   The dead brother the
dying mother, the foreign friend had
fallen into a distant
.p400
background. But at the same time
Peter Ivanovitch was absolutely
nowhere now. And this thought
consoled me. Yet I saw the 
gigantic shadow of Russian life
deepening around her like the
darkness of an advancing night. It
would devour her presently. I
inquired after Mrs Haldin{ -- }that
other victim of the deadly shade.
   A remorseful uneasiness appeared
in her frank eyes. Mother seemed
no worse but if I only knew what
strange fancies she had sometimes!
Then Miss Haldin glancing at
her watch declared that she could
not stay a moment longer
and with a hasty handshake ran
off lightly.
   Decidedly Mr Razumov was not
to turn up that day. Enigmatical youth. . . .
   But less than an hour afterwards while
crossing the Place Mollard I caught
sight of him boarding a south shore
tramcar.
   {---}{op"}He's going to the Chateau Borel" I thought.
{         *           *            *      }
.p401
   After depositing Razumov at the gates of the
Chateau Borel some half a mile or so from
the town the car continued its
journey, between two straight lines of shady trees. Across the
roadway in the sunshine a short wooden pier jutted into the
shallow pale water which further out had an intense blue tint
contrasting unpleasantly with the green orderly slopes
the opposite shore.
The whole view, with the harbour jetties of
crudely white stone underlining the dark front of the town to the
left, and the expanding space of water to the right with
jutting promontories of no particular character,
had the uninspiring, glittering surface
of a very fresh oleograph. Razumor turned his back on it with
contempt. He thought it odious{ -- }oppresively odious in its
.p402
unsuggestive finish, the very perfection of mediocrity attained
at last after centuries of toil and culture. And turning his
back on it he faced the entrance to the grounds of the Chateau
Borel. 
   The bars of the central way and the wrought iron arch,
between the dark weather stained stone piers, were very rusty;
and, though fresh tracks of wheels ran under it,
the gate looked as if it had not been opened for a very long
time. But close against the lodge built of the same grey stone as
the piers (its windows were all boarded), there was a
small side entrance. The bars of that were
rusty too; it stood ajar and looked as though it had not been
closed for a long time. In fact Razumov trying to push it
.p403
open a little wider discovered that it was
immoveable. 
   {op"}Democratic virtue. There are no thieves here apparently"
he muttered to himself, with displeasure. Before advancing
into the grounds he looked back sourly at an idle working man
lounging on the stone bench in the clean, broad avenue. The
fellow had thrown his feet up; one of his arms hung over the
low back of the public seat; he was taking a day off in lordly
repose as if everything in sight belonged to him. 
   {op"}Elector. Eligible. Enlightened," Razumor muttered to
himself. {op"}A brute all the same."
.p404
   Razumov entered the grounds and
walked back up the wide sweep of the drive
trying to think of nothing{ -- }to rest his head, to rest his emotions too. But
arriving at the foot of the terrace before the house he
faltered affected physically by some invisible interference.
The mysteriousness of his quickened heart-beats startled him.
He stopped short and looked at the brick wall of the terrace,
faced with shallow arches, meagrely clothed by the shoots of a
few unthriving creepers, with a neglected narrow flower bed
along its foot. 
   {op"}It is here!" he thought, with a sort of awe. {op"}It is
here{ -- }on this very spot ... " 
   He was tempted to flight at the mere recollection of his first meeting with Natalia Haldin He
confessed it to himself; but he did not move, and that not
because he wished to resist an unworthy weakness but because
.p405
he knew that he had no place to fly to. Moreover he could not
leave Geneva. He recognised even without thinking that it was
impossible. It would have been a fatal admission, an act of
moral suicide. It would have been also physically dangerous.
Slowly he
ascended the stairs of the terrace flanked by two stained
greenish stone urns of funereal aspect. 
   Across the broad platform where a few blades of grass
sprouted from the discoloured gravel, the door of the house,
with its ground-floor windows shuttered, faced him, wide open.
He believed that his approach had been noted
because, 
framed in the doorway, without his tall
.p406
hat Peter Ivanovitch seemed to be waiting for him 
   The ceremonious black frockcoat and the bared head
of Europe's greatest feminist accentuated the dubiousness of
his status in relation to the house rented by
Mrs de S{---}, his Egeria. His aspect combined the formality of the
caller with the freedom of the proprietor. Florid and thickly
hirsute and masked by the dark blue glasses,
he met the visitor and at once took him familiarly under the
arm. 
   Razumov suppressed every sign of repugnance by an effort which the
constant necessity of repression had rendered almost mechanical
.p407
And this effort had settled his expression in a cast of austere,
almost fanatical aloofness. 
   The {op"}heroic fugitive" impressed
afresh by the severe detachment of this new arrival from the
revolutionary Russia took a conciliatory, even
confidential tone. Mme de S{---} was resting after a bad
night.  She often had bad nights.  He had left his hat upstairs on the
landing and had come down to suggest to his young friend
a stroll and a good open hearted talk in one of the shady alleys behind the
house.  After voicing this proposal
the great man glanced at the unmoved scornful
face by his side and could not restrain himself from exclaiming: 
   {op"}On my word young man you are an extraordinary person." 
.p408
   {op"}I fancy you are mistaken Peter Ivanovitch. If I were
really an extraordinary person I would not be here, walking
with you in a garden in Switzerland, Canton of Geneva, Commune
of{ -- }what's the name of the commune this place belongs to? ... 
Never mind{ -- }the heart of democracy, anyhow. A fit heart for
it; no bigger than a parched pea and about as much value. I
am no more extraordinary than the rest of us Russians
wandering abroad." 
   But Peter Ivanovitch protested emphatically. 
   {op"}No! No! You are not ordinary. I have some experience
of Russians who are{ -- }well{ -- }living abroad. You appear to me
and to others too, a marked personality.". . . .
   {op"}What does he mean by this?" Razumor asked himself 
.p409
turning his eyes fully on his companion. The face
of Peter Ivanovitch expressed a meditative seriousness. 
   {op"}You don't suppose Kirylo Sidorovitch that I have not
heard of you from various points where you made yourself known
on your way here. I have had letters." 
   {op"}Oh we are great in talking about each other" interjected
Razumor who was listening with great attention. {op"}Gossip, tales,
suspicions and all that sort of thing we know how to deal in
to perfection. Calumny even.... " 
   In indulging in this sally
Razumov managed very well to conceal the feeling of anxiety that came
over him. At the same time he was saying to
himself that there could be no earthly reason for anxiety. He
.p410
was relieved by the evident sincerity of the protesting voice. 
   {op"}Heavens!" cried Peter Ivanovitch. {op"}What are you talking
about! What reason can {it}you{ro} have to.... " 
   The great exile flung up his
arms as if words had failed him in sober truth. Razumov was
satisfied. Yet he was moved to continue in the same vein. 
   {op"}I am talking of the poisonous plants which flourish in
the world of conspirators like evil mushrooms in a dark cellar"
   {op"}You are casting aspersions" remonstrated Peter Ivanovitch,
{op"}which as far as you are concerned...." 
   {op"}No!" Razumov interrupted without heat. {op"}Indeed I don't
.p411
want to cast aspersions. But it's just as well to have no
illusions." 
   Peter Ivanovitch gave him an inscrutable glance of his
dark spectacles, accompanied by a faint smile. 
   {op"}The man who says that he has no illusions has at least
that one" he said in a very friendly tone. {op"}But I see how it
is Kirylo Sidorovitch. You aim at stoicism." 
   {op"}Stoicism. That's a pose of the Greeks and the Romans.
Let's leave it to them. We are Russians that is{ -- }children{ -- }
that is{ -- }sincere; that is{ -- }cynical if you like. But that's
not a pose." 
   A long silence ensued. They strolled slowly under the
lime trees. Peter Ivanovitch had put his hands behind his
.p412
back. Razumor felt the ungravelled ground of the deeply
shaded walk damp and as if slippery under his feet. He asked
himself with uneasiness if he were saying the right things. The
direction of the conversation ought to have been more under
his control, he reflected. The great man appeared to be
reflecting on his side too. He cleared his throat slightly,
and Razumor felt at once a painful reawakening of his scorn and
his suspicion. 
   {op"}I am astonished" began Peter Ivanovitch gently. {op"}
Supposing you are right in your indictment how can you raise any
question of calumny or gossip in your case? It is
unreasonable. The fact is Kirylo Sidorovitch there is not enough known
of you to give hold to gossip or even calumny. Just now you
.p413
are a man, who had a part in doing a great deed, in something
that had been, hoped for, and tried for too, without
success. People have perished for attempting that which you and Haldin have
done at last. You come to us out of Russia with that prestige.
But you cannot deny that you have not been
communicative, Kirylo Sidorovitch. People you have met imparted their impressions to
me; one wrote this, another that, but I form my own opinions.
I waited to see you first. You are a man out of the common. That's positively so. You
are close, very close. This taciturnity, this severe brow this
something inflexible and secret in you inspires hopes and a
.p414
little wonder as to what you may mean. There is something of a Brutus . . ." 
   {op"}Pray spare me those classical allusions" burst out
Razumov nervously. {op"}What comes Junius Brutus to do here? It
is ridiculous. Do you mean to say" he added sarcastically but
lowering his voice {op"}that the Russian revolutionists are all
patricians and that I am an aristocrat?" 
   Peter Ivanovitch, who had been
helping himself with a few gestures clasped his hands again behind
his back and made a few steps pondering. 
   {op"}Not all patricians" he muttered vaguely. {op"}But
you at any rate are one of {it}us{ro}".
   Razumor smiled bitterly. 
.p415
   {op"}To be sure my name is not Gugenheimer" he said in a low
vibrating voice. {op"}I am not a democratic Jew. How can I
help it? Not everybody has such luck. I have no name I have
no.... ." 
   The European celebrity showed a great concern. He
stepped back a pace and his arms flew
in front of his person, extended,
deprecatory, almost entreating. His deep bass voice was full
of pain. 
   {op"}But my dear young friend!" he cried. {op"}My dear Kirylo
Sidorovitch.... " 
   Razumov shook his head. 
   {op"}The very patronimic you are so civil as to use when
.p416
addressing me I have no legal right to{ -- }but what of that. I
don't wish to claim it. I have no father. So much the better.
But I will tell you what: my mother's grandfather was a peasant
{ -- }a serf. See how much I am one of {it}you{ro}. I don't want anyone
to claim me. But Russia {it}can't{ro} disown me. She can not!" 
   Razumov struck his breast with his fist. 
   {op"}I am {it}it{ro}!" 
   Peter Ivanovitch walked on slowly, his head
lowered. Razumov followed vexed with himself.
That was not the right sort of talk. All sincerity was an
imprudence. Yet one could not renounce truth altogether{ -- }he
thought with a touch of despair. Peter Ivanovitch meditating
behind his dark glasses became to him suddenly so odious that if
he had had a knife
.p417
he fancied he could have stabbed him not only without
compunction but with a horrible, triumphant satisfaction. His
imagination dwelt on that atrocity in spite of himself. It was as
if he were becoming light-headed. {op"}It is not what is expected
of me" he repeated to himself. {op"}It is not what is. . . .  I could
get away by breaking the fastening on the little gate I see there in the
back wall. It is a flimsy lock. Nobody in the house seems to
know he is here with me . Oh yes. The hat. These women shall
presently discover the hat he has left on the landing. They would come
upon him lying dead in this damp gloomy shade{ -- }but I would be gone
and no one could ever. . . .  Lord! Am I going mad?" he asked
himself in a fright. 
   The deep bass of the great man was heard{ -- }musing in an
.p418
undertone. 
   {op"}H'm yes. That. . . . .  no doubt. . . . . . in a certain sense . . ."
He raised his voice. {op"}There is a deal of pride about you. . . ." 
   The intonation of Peter Ivanovitch took on a homely
familiar ring acknowledging in a way Razumov's claim to peasant
descent. 
   {op"}A great deal of pride brother Kirylo. And I don't say
that you have no justification for it. I have admitted you had.
I have ventured to allude to the facts of your birth simply
because I attach no mean importance to it. You are one of us
{ -- }{it}un des no{icr}tres{ro}. I reflect on that with satisfaction." 
   {op"}I attach some importance to it too" said Razumov quietly.
{op"}I wont even deny that it may have some importance for you
.p419
too" he continued after a slight pause and with a touch of
grimness of which he was himself aware with some annoyance
but which, he hoped, had escaped the perception of Peter
Ivanovitch. {op"}But suppose we talk no more about it?" 
   {op"}Well, we shall not{ -- }not after this one time Kirylo
Sidorovitch" persisted the noble arch-priest of Revolution.
{op"}This shall be the last occasion. You cannot believe for a
moment that I had the slightest idea of wounding your feelings.
You are clearly a superior nature{ -- }that's how I read you.
Quite above the common{ -- }h'm{ -- }susceptibilities. But the
fact is Kirylo Sidorovitch I don't know your susceptibilities.
Nobody, out of Russia, knows much of you{ -- }as yet". 
   {op"}You have been watching me" suggested Razumov. 
.p420
   {op"}Yes." 
   The great man had spoken in a tone of perfect frankness
but as they turned their faces to each other Razumov felt
baffled by the dark spectacles. Under their cover Peter
Ivanovitch hinted that he had felt for some time the need of
meeting a man of energy and character
in view of a certain project. He said
nothing more precise however; and after some critical remarks
upon the personalities of the various members of the Committee
of Revolutionary action in Stuttgard he let the conversation
lapse for quite a long while. They paced the alley from end
to end. Razumov, silent too raised his eyes from time to time
to cast a glance at the back of the house. It offered no sign
of being inhabited. With its grimy weather-stained walls
.p421
and all the windows shuttered from top to bottom it looked damp
and gloomy and deserted. It might very well have been haunted
in traditional style by some doleful, groaning, futile ghost
of a middle-class order. The shades evoked, as worldly rumour
had it, by Mme. de S{---} to meet statesmen, diplomatists,
deputies of various European parliaments, must have been of
another sort. Razumov had never seen Mme de S{---} but in the
carriage. 
   Peter Ivanovitch came out of his abstraction. 
   {op"}Two things I may say to you at once. I believe first
that neither a leader nor any decisive action can come out of the
dregs of a people. Now, if you ask me what are the dregs of
.p422
a people{ -- }h'm{ -- }it would take too long to tell. You would be
surprised at the variety of ingredients that for me go to the
making up of these dregs{ -- }of that which ought, must remain at
the bottom. Moreover such a statement might be subject to
discussion. But I can tell you what is {it}not{ro} the dregs. On
that it is impossible for us to disagree. The peasantry of a people
is not the dregs; neither is its highest class{ -- }well{ -- }the
nobility. Reflect on that Kirylo Sidorovitch! I believe you are
well fitted for reflection. Everything in a people that is
not genuine, not its own by origin or development is{ -- }well{ -- }
dirt. Intelligence in the wrong place is that. Foreign bred
doctrines are that. Dirt. Dregs.....  The second thing I would
offer to your meditation is this: that for us at this moment
there yawns a chasm between the past and the future. It will
.p423
never be bridged by foreign liberalism. All attempts at it
are either folly or cheating. Bridged it can never be. It
has to be filled up."  
   A sort of sinister jocularity had crept into the tones
of the burly feminist. He seized Razumov's arm above the
elbow and gave it a slight shake. {op"}Do you understand enigmatical young
man? It has got to be just filled up."
   Razumov kept an unmoved countenance. 
   {op"}Don't you think that I have already gone beyond
meditation on that subject?" he said freeing his arm by a quiet
movement which increased the distance a little between himself
and Peter Ivanovitch as they went on strolling abreast. And
he added that surely whole cartloads of words and theories
.p424
could never fill that chasm. The abruptness of his tone
was caused by his contempt for the celebrated man at his side.
No meditation was necessary. A sacrifice of many lives could
alone.......  He fell silent without finishing the phrase. 
   Peter Ivanovitch inclined his big hairy head slowly, and
proposed that they should go and see if Mme. de S{---} was now
visible. 
   {op"}We shall get some tea" he said turning out of the shaded
gloomy walk with a brisker step. 
   The lady companion had been on the look out. Her
dark skirt whisked out of the doorway, as the two men came in
sight round the corner. She ran off somewhere altogether and
had disappeared when they entered the hall. In the crude
.p425
light falling from the dusty glass skylight in the roof upon the black
and white tesselated floor covered with muddy tracks, their
footsteps echoed faintly. The great feminist led the way up.
On the balustrade of the first floor landing
a shiny tall hat reposed, rim upwards, opposite a double door
of the drawing room, haunted it was said, by evoked ghosts, and
frequented, it was to be supposed, by fugitive revolutionists.
The cracked white paint of the panels, the tarnished gilt of the mouldings,
permitted one to imagine nothing but dust and
emptiness within. Before turning the massive brass
handle Peter Ivanovitch gave his young companion a sharp,
partly critical, partly preparatory glance. 
   {op"}No one is perfect" he murmured discreetly. Thus
.p426
the possessor of a rare jewel might before opening the casket
warn the profane that no gem perhaps is flawless. 
   He remained with his hand on the door-handle so long
that Razumov assented by a moody {op"}No." 
   {op"}Perfection itself would not produce that effect" pursued
Peter Ivanovitch{ -- }{op"}in a world not meant for it. But you will
find there a mind{ -- }no! the quintessence of feminine intuition
which will understand any perplexity you may be suffering from{ -- }by the irresistible, enlightening force of sympathy. Nothing
can remain obscure before that, that{ -- }inspired, yes inspired
penetration, this true light of feminity." 
   The gaze of the dark spectacles in its glassy
steadfastness gave his face an air of absolute conviction. Razumov
.p427
felt a momentary shrinking before that mysterious door. 
   {op"}Light" he stammered out. {op"}Do you mean some sort of
thought-reading?" 
   Peter Ivanovitch seemed shocked. 
   {op"}I mean something utterly different" he retorted. A faint
pitying smile succeeded this tart declaration. 
   Razumov began to feel angry, very much against his wish. 
   {op"}This is very mysterious" he muttered through his teeth. 
   {op"}You don't object to being understood, to being guided"
queried the great feminist. 
   Razumov exploded in a fierce whisper. 
   {op"}In what sense? Be pleased to understand
than I am a serious person. Who do you take me for?" 
.p428
   They looked at each other very close.
Razumov's temper was cooled by the impenetrable earnestness
of the blue glasses meeting his stare. Peter Ivanovitch
turned the handle at last. 
   {op"}You shall hear directly" he said pushing the door
open. 
   A low pitched but harsh voice was heard within the room. 
   {op"}Enfin. Vous voila{gr}." 
   In the doorway, his black-coated bulk blocking the
view Peter Ivanovitch had a hearty tone with something boastful
in it. 
   {op"}Yes. Here I am." 
   He glanced over his shoulder at Razumov who waited for him
.p429
to move on. 
   {op"}And I am bringing you a proved conspirator{ -- }a real one
this time. Un vrai celui la{gr}." 
   This pause in the doorway gave the {op"}proved conspirator"
time to make sure that his face did not betray neither his
angry curiosity nor his mental disgust. 
   These sentiments stand confessed in Mr. Razumov's
memorandum of his first interview with Mme. de S{---}. The very
words I use in my narrative are written where their sincerity
can not be suspected. At any rate the sincerity of their
self-revealing intention can not be. Out of those pages
summarising months here, detailing days there, with an almost
incredible precision, out of neat record of contradictory,
.p430
incoherent thoughts emerges a personality struggling for
existence both against truth and falsehood; a personality
rising to a symbolic significance on account of the revealing
nature of its individual fate. The record which could not have
been meant for any one's eyes but his own, was not, I think
the outcome of that strange impulse of indiscretion, common
to men who lead secret lives, which accounts
for the invariable existence of {op"}compromising documents"
in all the plots and conspiracies of history. He looked at
it, I suppose, as a man looks at himself in a mirror, with
wonder, perhaps with anguish, with anger or despair. Yes,
as a threatened man may look fearfully at his own face in the
glass formulating to himself re-assuring excuses for his
.p431
appearance marked by the taint of some insidious hereditary
disease. 
.p432
{cn}II
{cop}The Egeria of the {op"}Russian Mazzini" produced at first view a strong
effect by the strikingly motionless character of her
malevolent expression, a deathlike immobility of
an obviously painted face. The slightly sunken cheeks were
faintly rouged, the lips touched with carmine, the eyebrows
accentuated artificially{ -- }the very eyelashes had been made to
look blacker than Nature had made them. The eyes, the only
feature that moved appeared extraordinarily brilliant. The
figure in a close fi ting dress admirably made but by no means
.p433
fresh had an elegant stiffness. The harsh voice inviting him
to sit down, the rigidity of the upright attitude with one arm
extended along the back of the sofa, the white gleam of the big
eyeballs setting off the black fathomless stare of the enlarged
pupils, impressed Razumov more than anything he had seen since
his hasty and secret departure from St. Petersburg. A witch
in Parisian clothes he thought. A portent! He actually
hesitated in his advance, and did not even comprehend at first
what the harsh voice was saying. 
   {op"}Sit down. Draw your chair nearer me. There. . . " 
   He sat down. At close quarters the pink cheek bones, the wrinkles,
the fine lines on each side of the vivid lips astounded him.
He was being received graciously with a smile which made him
think of a grinning skull. 
.p434
   {op"}We have been hearing about you for some time." 
   He did not know what to say and murmured some disconnected
words. The grinning skull effect vanished. 
   {op"}And do you know that the general complaint is that you have
shown yourself very reserved everywhere." 
   Razumov remained silent for a time, thinking of his
answer. 
   {op"}I, don't you see, am a man of action" he said huskily,
glancing upwards. Peter
Ivanovitch stood in portentous expectant silence by the side of
his chair, his spectacles devotedly directed at the painted and
plastered woman on the sofa. A slight feeling of nausea came
over Razumov. What could be the relations of these two people
.p435
to each other? She like a galvanised corpse out of some
Hoffman's Tale, he the preacher of feminist gospels for all
the world and a super-revolutionist besides! This ancient
painted mummy with unfathomable eyes and this burly, bull-necked, deferential . . . . What was it? Witchcraft, fascination
. . . . . . {op"}It's for her money" he thought. {op"}She has millions." 
   The walls, the floor of the room were bare like a barn.
The few pieces of furniture havd been discovered in
the garrets and dragged down into service without having been
properly dusted even. It was the refuse the banker's
widow had left behind her. The windows without curtains had
an indigent, sleepless look. In two of them the dirty yellowy-white blinds had been pulled down. All this spoke not of
poverty but of sordid penuriousness. 
.p436
   The hoarse voice on the sofa spoke angrily. 
   {op"}You are looking round Kirylo Sidorovitch. I have been
shamefully robbed, positively ruined." 
   A dry, rattling laugh which seemed beyond her control
interrupted her for a moment. 
   {op"}A slavish nature would find consolation in the
fact that the principal robber was an exalted and almost a
sacro-sanct person{ -- }a Grand Duke in fact. Do you understand
Mr. Razumov? A Grand Duke . . . . . . No! You have no idea, what
thieves those people are! Downright thieves!" 
   Her bosom heaved but the arm remained rigidly extended
along the back of the couch. 
   {op"}You will only upset yourself" breathed out a deep voice
.p437
which to Razumov's startled glance seemed to proceed from under
the steady spectacles of Peter Ivanovitch rather than from
his lips which had hardly moved. 
   {op"}What of that? I say thieves! Voleurs! Voleurs!" 
   Razumov was quite confounded by this unexpected vicious
clamour which had in it something of wailing and croaking and
more than a suspicion of hysteria. 
   {op"}Voleurs! Voleurs! Vol . . . . . " 
   {op"}No power on earth can rob you of your genius" shouted
Peter Ivanovitch in an overpowering bass, but without stirring, without attempting
a gesture of any kind. A profound silence fell. 
   Razumov remained outwardly impassive. {op"}What is the meaning
of this performance" he was asking himself. But with a
.p438
preliminary sound of bumping outside some door behind him
the lady companion in a threadbare black skirt and frayed
blouse came in rapidly walking on her heels, and carrying
in both hands a big Russian samovar obviously too heavy for
her. Razumov made an instinctive movement to help which startled her
so much that she nearly dropped her hissing burden.
She managed however to land it on the table and looked so
frightened that Razumov hastened to sit down. She produced
then from an adjacent room four glass tumblers, a tea pot and a
sugar basin, on a black iron tray. 
   The harsh voice spoke from the sofa abruptly. 
   {op"}Les ga{cr}teaux? Have you remembered to bring the cakes." 
   Peter Ivanovitch without a word marched out on to the
landing and returned instantly with a parcel wrapped up in white
.p439
glazed paper, which he must have extracted from the interior
of his hat. With imperturbable gravity he undid the string
and smoothed the paper open on a part of the table within
reach of Mme. De S{---}'s hand. The lady companion poured out
the tea then retired into a distant corner out of everybody's
sight, and a conversation began. From time to time Mme. de S{---}
extended a claw like hand glittering with costly rings, toward
the paper of cakes, took up one and devoured it, displaying her
big false teeth ghoulishly. Later on Razumov acquired grounds
for the belief that this was the most substantial meal of the
day for the Egeria of the Russian Mazzini. Meantime she talked
harshly of the political situation in the Balkans. She built
great hopes on some complication in the peninsula for arousing
a great movement of national indignation in Russia against
.p440
{op"}these thieves{ -- }thieves{ -- }thieves."
   {op"}You will only upset yourself" Peter Ivanovitch interposed
raising his glassy gaze. He smoked cigarettes and drank tea
in silence, continuously. When he had finished a glass he
flourished his hand in a beckoning manner above his shoulder.
At that signal the lady companion ensconced and still in her corner, with
round eyes like a watchful animal, would dart out to the table
and pour him out another tumblerful. 
   Razumov looked at her once or twice. She was anxious,
tremulous, though neither Mme. de S{---} nor Peter Ivanovitch
paid the slightest attention to her. {op"}What have they done
between them to that forlorn creature" Razumov asked himself.
{op"}Have they terrified her out of her senses with ghosts or
simply have they only been beating her?" When she gave him his
.p441
second glass of tea he noticed that her lips trembled in
the manner of a scared person about to burst into speech. But of
course she said nothing and retired into her corner as if hugging
to herself the smile of thanks he gave her. 
   {op"}She may be worth cultivating" thought Razumov suddenly. 
   He was calming down, getting hold of the actuality into which 
he had been thrown{ -- }for the first time perhaps since Victor
Haldin had entered his room . . . . . . . and had gone out again. He was
aware of being the object of the famous{ -- }or notorious{ -- }Mme.
de S{---} ghastly graciousness. 
   Mme. de S{---} was pleased to discover that this young man
was different from the other types of revolutionist members
of committees, secret emissaries, vulgar and unmannerly
.p442
fugitive professors, rough students, ex-cobblers with apostolic
faces, consumptive and ragged enthusiasts, Jewish youths,
common fellows of all sorts that used to come and go around
Peter Ivanovitch{ -- }fanatics, pedants, proletarians all. It
was possible to talk to this young man of notably good
appearance{ -- }for Mme. de S{ -- }was not always in a mystical
state of mind. Razumov's taciturnity only excited her to a
quicker more voluble utterance. It still dealt with the
Balkans. She knew all the statesmen of that region, Turks,
Bulgarians, Servians, Montenegrins, Roumanians, Greeks,
Armenians and nondescripts young and old, the living and the
dead. With some money an intrigue could be started which would
set the Peninsula in a blaze and outrage the sentiment of
.p443
the Russian people. A cry of abandoned brothers could be
raised and then with the nation seething with indignation
a couple of regiments or so would be enough to begin a military
revolution in St. Petersburg and make an end of these thieves 
. . . . . 
   {op"}Apparently I've got only to sit still and listen" the
silent Razumov thought to himself. {op"}As to that hairy and
obscene brute (in such terms did Mr. Razumov refer mentally to
the popular expounder of a feministic conception of social
state) as to him, for all his cunning he too shall speak out
at last." 
   Razumov ceased to think for a moment.
Then a
sombre-toned reflexion formulated itself to his mind ironical
.p444
and bitter. {op"}I have the gift of inspiring confidence." He
heard himself laughing aloud. It was like a goad to the
painted shiny-eyed harridan on a sofa. 
   {op"}You may well laugh" she burst out hoarsely. {op"}What else
can one do! Perfect swindlers and what base swindlers at that!
Cheap Germans{ -- }Holstein-Gottorps! Though indeed it's hardly
safe to say who and what they are. A family that counts a
creature like Catherine the Great in its ancestry{ -- }you
understand." 
   {op"}You are only upsetting yourself" said Peter Ivanovitch
patiently but in a firm tone. This admonition had its usual
effect on the Egeria. She dropped her thick discoloured eyelids
on the permanent excitement of her eyes and changed her
position on the sofa. All her
.p445
movements, angular and lifeless, seemed completely automatic
now that her eyes were nearly closed. Presently she opened
them very full. Peter Ivanovitch drank tea steadily, without
haste. 
   {op"}Well, I declare!" She addressed Razumov directly. {op"}The
people who have seen you on your way here are right. You are
reserved. You haven't spoken twenty words altogether since
you came in. You let nothing of your thoughts be seen in your
face either." 
   {op"}I have been listening Madame," said Razumov using French
for the first time, hesitatingly not being certain of his
accent. But it seemed to produce an excellent impression.
.p446
Mme. de S{ -- }looked meaningly into Peter Ivanovitch's spectacles as
if to convey her conviction of this young man's merit. She
even nodded the least bit, in his direction and Razumov heard
her murmur under her breath the words {op"}later on{ -- }in the diplomatic
service" which could not but refer to the favourable impression
he had made. The fantastic absurdity of it revolted him
because it seemed to outrage his ruined hopes with the vision
of a mock-career. Peter Ivanovitch impassive as though he
were deaf drank some more tea. Razumov felt that
he must say something.
.p447
   {op"}Yes" he began deliberately as if uttering a meditated
opinion. {op"}Clearly. Even in planning a purely military
revolution the temper of the people should be taken into account."
   {op"}You have understood me perfectly. The discontent should
be spiritualised. That is what the ordinary head of revolutionary
committees will not understand. They aren't capable of
it. For instance Mordatiev was in Geneva last month. 
Peter Ivanovitch brought him here. You know Mordatiev? Well
yes{ -- }you have heard. They call him an eagle{ -- }a hero! He has
never done half as much as you have. Never attempted{ -- }not
.p448
half. . . . . " 
   Mme. de S. agitated herself angularly on the sofa. 
   {op"}We of course talked to him. And do you know what he
said to me? {op'}What have we to do with Balkan intrigues? We
must simply extirpate the scoundrels.' Extirpate is all very
well{ -- }but what then? The imbecile! I screamed at him. {op'}but
you must spiritualise{ -- }don't you understand{ -- }spiritualise
the discontent. . . . . " 
   She felt nervously in her pocket for a handkerchief; she
pressed it to her lips. 
   {op"}Spiritualise" said Razumov interrogatively, watching her
heaving breast. The long ends of an old black lace scarf
she wore over her head slipped off and hung down on each side
.p449
of her ghastly rosy cheeks
   {op"}An odious creature" she burst out again. {op"}Imagine a
man who takes five lumps of sugar in his tea. . . . . . Yes. I said
spiritualise! How else can you make discontent effective and
universal?" 
   {op"}Listen to this{ -- }young man" Peter Ivanovitch made himself
heard solemnly.
   Razumov looked at him suspiciously. 
   {op"}Some say hunger will do that" he remarked. 
   {op"}Yes. I know. Our people are starving in heaps. But you
can't make famine universal. And it is not despair that we want
to create. There is no moral support to be got out of that.
It is indignation. . . . . . . "
.p450
   Mme. de S. let her thin extended arm sink on her knees. 
   {op"}I am not a Mordatiev" began Razumov. 
   {op"}Bien su{cr}r!" murmured Mme. de S. 
   {op"}Though I too am ready to say extirpate, extirpate. But
in my ignorance of political work permit me to ask: A Balkan{ -- }
well{ -- }intrigue, wouldn't that take a very long time?" 
   Peter Ivanovitch got up and moved off quietly to stand with
his face to the window. Razumov heard a door close; he turned
his head and perceived that the lady companion had scuttled
out of the room. 
   {op"}In matters of politics I am a supernaturalist" Mme. de
S. broke the silence harshly. 
   Peter Ivanovitch moved away from the window and struck
.p451
Razumov lightly on the shoulder. This was a signal for
leaving but at the same time he addressed Mme. de S. in a
peculiar reminding tone 
   {op"}Eleonor".
   Whatever it meant she disregarded the ejaculation. She
leaned back in the corner of the sofa like a wooden figure.
The brazen peevishness
of the face framed in the limp rusty lace had a character of
cruelty. 
   {op"}As to extirpating" she croaked at the attentive
Razumov "there is only one class in Russia which must be
extirpated. Only one. And that class consists of only one
family. You understand me? That one family must be extirpated." 
.p452
   Her rigidity was frightful, like the rigour of a corpse
galvanised into harsh speech and glittering stare by the force
of murderous hate. The sight fascinated Razumov{ -- }yet he felt
more self-possessed at that moment than at any other since he
had entered that weirdly bare room. He was interested. But
the great feminist by his side again uttered his appeal: 
   {op"}Eleonor!" 
   She disregarded it. Her carmine lips
moved with an extraordinary rapidity. The liberating spirit
would use arms before which rivers would part like Jordan and
ramparts fall down like the walls of Jericho. The deliverance
from bondage would be effected by plagues and by signs by
wonders and by war. The women . . . . . . . 
.p453
   {op"}Eleonor!" 
   She ceased; she had heard him at last
She pressed her open hand to her forehead. 
   {op"}What is it? Ah yes! That girl{ -- }the sister of . . . . . . .
   It was Miss Haldin that she meant. That young girl and
her mother had been leading a very retired life. They were
provincial ladies{ -- }were they not? The mother had been very
beautiful{ -- }traces were left yet. Peter Ivanovitch when he
called there for the first time was greatly struck. . . . . . . But the
cold way they received him was really surprising.
   {op"}He is one of our national glories" Mme. de S. cried out
.p454
with sudden vehemence {op"}All the world listens to him." 
   {op"}I don't know these ladies" said Razumov loudly rising
from his chair. 
   {op"}What are you saying Kirilo Sidorovitch? I understand
that she was talking to you here in the garden the other day." 
   {op"}Yes, in the garden" said Razumov gloomily. Then with an
effort: {op"}She made herself known to me." 
   {op"}And then ran away from us all" Mme. de S. continued with
ghastly vivacity. {op"}After coming to the very door! What a
peculiar proceeding! Well, I have been a shy little provincial
girl at one time. Yes. Razumov" (she fell into this
familiarity intentionally with an appalling grimace of
graciousness. Razumov gave a perceptible start) {op"}Yes. That's
.p455
my origin. A simple provincial family." 
   {op"}You are wonderful" Peter Ivanovitch uttered in his
deepest voice. 
   But it was to Razumov that she gave her death's head
smile. Her tone was quite imperious. 
   {op"}You must bring the young wild thing here. She is wanted.
I reckon upon your success{ -- }mind." 
   {op"}She is not a wild young thing" muttered Razumov in a
surly voice. 
   {op"}Well then{ -- }that's all the same. She may be one of these
young conceited democrats. Do you know what I think? I think
she is very much like you in character. There is a smouldering
fire of scorn in you. You are darkly self-sufficient but I
.p456
can see your very soul." 
   Her shiny eyes had a dry intense stare, which missing Razumov
gave him an absurd notion that she was looking at
something behind him. He cursed himself for an impressionable
fool and spoke with forced calmness. 
   {op"}What is it you see? Anything resembling me?" 
   She moved her rigidly set face
from left to right. It was impossible somehow to meet her
eyes, to capture that stare. 
   {op"}Some sort of phantom in my image?" pursued Razumov slowly.
{op"}For, I suppose, a soul when it is seen is just that. A vain
thing. There are phantoms of the living as well as of the 
dead." 
.p457
   The tenseness of Mrs. de S{---}'s stare had relaxed and now
she looked at Razumov in a silence which became disconcerting.
   {op"}I myself have had an experience" he stammered out as if
compelled. {op"}I've seen a phantom." 
   The unnaturally red lips moved to frame a question harshly.
   {op"}Of a dead person?" 
   {op"}No. Living." 
   {op"}A friend?" 
   {op"}No." 
   {op"}An enemy?" 
   {op"}I hated him." 
   {op"}Ah! It was not a woman then?" 
   {op"}A woman!" repeated Razumov his eyes looking straight
.p458
into the eyes of Mme. de S{---}. {op"}Why should it have been a
woman? But why this conclusion? Why should I not have been
able to hate a woman?" 
   As a matter of fact the idea of hating a woman was new to
him. At that very moment he hated Mme. de S. But it was
not exactly that. It was more like the abhorrence that may
be caused by a wooden or plaster figure of a repulsive kind.
And she moved no more than if she were such a figure; even her
eyes whose unwinking stare plunged into his own, though shining
were lifeless as though they were as artificial as her teeth. The red lips
were like the lips of an idol. For the first time
Razumov became aware of a faint perfume; but faint as it was
it nauseated him exceedingly. Peter Ivanovitch tapped him
.p459
slightly on the shoulder. Thereupon he bowed and was about to turn
away without any other leave-taking when he received the unexpected
favour of a bony inanimate hand extended to him
with the two words in hoarse French. 
   {op"}Au revoir." 
   He bowed over the skeleton hand and left the room escorted by the great
man who made him go out first. The voice from the sofa cried
harshly. 
   {op"}You remain here Pierre." 
   {op"}Certainly{ -- }ma che{a}re amie." 
   But he left the room with Razumov shutting the door behind him. The
landing was prolonged into a bare, unfurnished corridor,
right and left, desolate perspectives of white and gold
.p460
decoration without a strip of carpet or wisp of a curtain. The
very light pouring through the many undraped windows seemed
dusty; and a solitary speck in all this crude whiteness
reposing on the balustrade of white marble{ -- }the silk top-hat
of the great feminist asserted itself extremely in the black
glossiness of a raven's plumage. 
   Peter Ivanovitch escorted the visitor to the very head
of the stairs without opening his lips.
Even when they had reached the head
of the stairs Peter Ivanovitch did not break the silence. He
simply stopped there. Razumov's impulse to continue down the
flight and out of the house without as much as a nod abandoned
.p461
him suddenly. He stopped on the first step and leaned his
back against the wall. Below him the great hall with its
chequered floor of black and white seemed absurdly large
and like some public place where a great power of resonnance
awaits the provocation of footfalls and voices. It was as if
afraid of awakening the loud echoes of that empty house that
Razumov adopted a low tone.
   {op"}I really have no mind to turn into a dilettante spiritualist."
   Peter Ivanovitch shook his head slightly, very 
serious. 
.p462
   {op"}Or spend my time in spiritual ecstasies or sublime
meditations upon the gospel of feminism" Razumov continued in the
same low voice. {op"}I made my way here for my share of action{ -- }
action! most respected Peter Ivanovitch.
It was not the
great European writer who attracted me, here, to this odious
town of liberty. It was somebody much greater. It was the
idea of the chief, which attracted me.
There are starving young men in Russia who believe in it so
much that it seems the only thing that keeps them alive in
their misery. Think of that Peter Ivanovitch. No! But only
think of that." 
   The great man thus entreated, perfectly motionless and
.p463
silent was the very image of patient placid respectability. 
   {op"}Of course I don't speak of the people. They are brutes"
added Razumov in the same subdued but forcible tone. At this
a protesting murmur, issued from the {op"}heroic fugitive's" beard"
A murmur of authority. 
   {op"}Say{ -- }children." 
   {op"}No! Brutes" Razumov insisted bluntly. 
   {op"}But they are sound, they are innocent" the great man
pleaded in a whisper. 
   {op"}As far as that goes a brute is sound enough." Razumov
raised his voice at last. {op"}And you can't deny the natural innocence
of a brute. But what's the use of disputing about names. You
.p464
just try to give children the power and stature of men and
see what they will be like. You just give it to them and see
. . .  But never mind that I tell you Peter Ivanovitch that half
a dozen young men do not come together nowadays in a shabby student's
room without your name being whispered not as a leader of
thought, but as a centre of revolutionary energies{ -- }
the centre of action. What else has drawn me near you, do you
think? It is not what all the world knows of you surely. It's
precisely what the world at large does not know. I was
irresistibly drawn{ -- }let us say impelled, yes impelled; or rather
compelled, driven{ -- }driven" repeated Razumov explosively and
ceased as if startled by the hollow reverberation of the
word {op"}Driven" along two bare corridor and down in the great empty hall.
.p465
Peter Ivanovitch did not seem startled in the least.
The young man could not control a dry nervous
laugh. Before that too the great revolutionist remained
unmoved with an effect of commonplace, homely, superiority.
   {op"}Curse him," said Razumov to himself, {op"}he
waiting behind his spectacles for me to give myself away."
Then aloud with a satanic enjoyment of the scorn prompting him
to play with the greatness of the great man. 
   {op"}Ah, Peter Ivanovitch if you only knew the force which
.p466
drew{ -- }no which {it}drove{ro} me towards you. The irresistible force." 
   He did not feel any desire to laugh now. 
This time Peter Ivanovitch moved his head
sideways, knowingly as much as to say {op"}Don't I?". This
expressive movement was almost imperceptible. Razumov went on with
an effort.
.p467
   {op"}All these days you have been trying to read me Peter Ivanovitch.
That is natural. I have perceived it and I have been frank.
Perhaps you may think I have not been very expansive? But with
a man like you it was not needed, it would have looked like an
impertinence perhaps.
And besides we Russians are prone to talk too much as a rule.
I have always felt that. And yet as a nation we are dumb. I
assure you that I am not likely to talk to you so much again{ -- }
Ha! Ha . . .
   Razumov still keeping
.p468
on the lower step came a little nearer to the
great man. 
   {op"}You have been condescending enough
I quite understood it was to lead me
on. You must render me the justice that
I have not tried to please. Your silence
now is another ordeal I have to pass
through. What more can I say? I have been
impelled, compelled or rather sent{ -- }let us say sent, towards you for
for a work that no one but myself can do? Ou would
call it a harmless delusion; a ridiculous delusion perhaps.
See! I am too frank to keep it from you{ -- }this delusion, at
which you don't even smile. It is absurd of me to talk like
.p469
this yet some day you shall remember these very words{ -- }
I hope. . . .  Enough of this. Here I stand before you{ -- }confessed! But one thing more I must add to complete it: a
mere blind tool I can never consent to be."
Whatever acknowledgement
Razumov was prepared for, he was not prepared to have both his
hands seized in the great man's grasp. The swiftness of the
movement was aggressive enough to startle. The burly
feminist could not have been quicker had his purpose been to jerk
Razumov treacherously up on the landing and bundle him behind one of the
numerous closed doors near by. This idea occurred
actually to Razumov; but he
.p470
had made up his mind not to
be disconcerted, and his hands being released after a
darkly eloquent squeeze he smiled with a beating heart straight at the beard
and the spectacles hiding that impenetrable
man. 
   He thought to himself (it stands confessed in his hand
.p471
writing): I won't move from here till he either speaks or turns away.
This is a duel. Many seconds passed without a sign or a
sound. 
   {op"}Yes, yes," the great man said hurriedly in subdued
tones as if the whole thing had been a stolen breathless
interview. {op"}Exactly. Come to see us here in a few days.
.p472
This must be gone into deeply{ -- }deeply, between you and me.
Quite to the bottom. To the . . .  and by the bye, you must
bring along Natalia Victorovna; you know? The Haldin girl . . ." 
   {op"}Am I to take this as my first instruction from you?"
inquired Razumov stiffly. 
   Peter Ivanovitch seemed perplexed by this new
attitude.
   {op"}Ah! hm! You are naturally the proper person{ -- }la personne
indique{a}e . . .  Everyone
shall be wanted presently. Everyone . . . " 
   He bent down from the landing over Razumov who had
lowered his eyes. 
   {op"}The moment approaches." he murmured.
   Razumov did not look up. He did not move till he heard
.p473
the door of the drawing room close behind the greatest of
feminists returning to his painted Egeria. Then he walked down
slowly into the hall. The door stood open, and the
shadow of the house was lying aslant over the greatest part of
the terrace.
While crossing it slowly he lifted his hat and wiped his damp
forehead as if after a great bodily exertion.
Half way across he stopped to pull
himself together, expelling his breath with force to get
rid of the last vestiges of the air he had been breathing
inside. He looked at the palms of his hands and moving
on again rubbed them gently against his thighs.
.p474
   He felt, bizarre as it may seem,
as though another self, an independent sharer of his
mind, had been able to view his whole person very distinctly
indeed.
{op"}This is
curious" he thought. After a while he formulated his opinion
of it in the mental ejaculation: {op"}beastly," This disgust
vanished before a marked uneasiness. {op"}It is an effect of
nervous exhaustion," he reflected with weary sagacity. {op"}How am
I to go on day after day if I have no more power of resistance{ -- }moral resistance." 
   He was following now the path at the foot of the terrace.
Moral resistance; moral resistance, he kept on repeating
.p475
these words mentally. Moral endurance. Yes, that was the
necessity of the situation. An immense longing to make his way
out of these grounds and to the other end of the town, of
throwing himself on his bed and going to sleep for hours,
swept everything clean out of his mind for a moment. {op"}Is it
possible that I am but a weak creature after all" he asked
himself in sudden alarm. {op"}Eh? What's this?" 
   He gave a start as if awakened from a dream. He even
swayed a little before recovering himself.
   {op"}Aha! You stole away from us quietly to walk about here" he said. 
   The lady companion stood before him; but how she came
there he had not the slightest idea. Her folded arms were
.p476
closely cherishing the furry cat. {op"}I have been unconscious
as I walked, it's a positive fact," said Razumov to himself in
wonder. He raised his hat with marked
civility. 
   The sallow woman
blushed duskily. She had her invariably scared uncertain
expression, as if somebody had just disclosed to her some
terrible news. But she held her ground, Razumov noticed, without
timidity. {op"}She is incredibly shabby" he thought. In the
sunlight her black costume looked
greenish with here and there threadbare patches
where the stuff seemed decomposed by age into a velvety black
furry state. Her very hair and eyebrows looked worn out.
.p477
Razumov wondered whether she were sixty years old. Her
figure tho' was young enough. He observed that she did not appear
starved but rather as though she had been fed on unwholesome
scraps and leavings of plates. 
   Razumov smiled amiably and moved out of her way. She only turned
her head to keep her scared eyes on him. 
   {op"}I know what you have been told in there," she affirmed 
without preliminarys. Her tone by contrast, no doubt, had an unexpectedly
assured character which put Razumov at his ease. 
   {op"}Do you? You must have heard all sort of talk on many
occasions{ -- }in there." 
   She varied her phrase with the same incongruous effect
of positiveness.
.p478
   {op"}I know to a certainty what you have been told to do." 
   {op"}Really? . . . ." Razumov shrugged his shoulders a little.
He was about to pass on with a bow, when a sudden thought
struck him. {op"}Yes. To be sure! In your confidential position
you are aware of many things," he suggested looking at the cat. 
   That animal got a momentary convulsive hug from the
lady companion. 
   {op"}Everything was disclosed to me a long time ago," she said.
   {op"}Everything," Razumov repeated absently.
   {op"}Peter Ivanovitch is an awful despot," she jerked out. 
   Razumov went on studying the stripes on the grey fur
of the cat. 
   {op"}An iron will is an integral part of such a temperament.
.p479
How else could he be a leader. And I think that you are
mistaken in{ -- }" 
   {op"}There!" she cried. {op"}He tells me that I am mistaken. But
.p480
 I tell you all the same that he cares for no one."
She jerked her head up with
the scared staring eyes. {op"}Don't you bring that girl here.
That's what you have been told to do{ -- }to bring that girl here.
Listen to me: you had better tie a stone round her neck and
throw her into the lake." 
.p481
   Razumov had a sensation of chill and gloom as if a heavy
cloud had passed over the sun. 
   {op"}The girl," he said. {op"}What have I to do with her?" 
   {op"}But you have been told to bring Natalia Haldin here.
Am I not right? Of course I am right. I was not in the room
but I know{ -- }I know Peter
Ivanovitch sufficiently well. He is a great man. Great men
are horrible. Well, that's it. Have nothing to do with her.
That's the best you can do unless you want her to become like
me." 
   {op"}Like you" repeated Razumov glaring at her face as devoid
of all comeliness of feature and complexion as the most miserable
beggar is of money. 
.p482
   {op"}Disillusioned" she whispered. 
   He smiled, still feeling chilly in the back, a peculiar
sensation which annoyed him. 
   {op"}Disillusioned as to Peter Ivanovitch. Is that all you
have lost?" 
   She declared looking frightened but with immense
conviction. 
   {op"}Peter Invanovitch stands for everything." Then she
added in another tone {op"}Keep the girl away from this house." 
   {op"}And are you absolutely inciting me to disobey Peter
Ivanovitch just because{ -- }because you are disillusioned?"
   She began to blink. 
   {---}{op"}Directly I saw you for the first time I was comforted.
.p483
You took your hat off to me. You looked as if one could trust
you. Oh . . . " 
   She shrank before Razumov's savage snarl. 
   {op"}I have heard something like this before." 
   She was so confounded that she could do nothing but blink
for a long time. 
   {op"}It was your humane manner," she stammered plaintively. {op"}I have been
starving for, I won't say kindness, but just for a little
civility for I don't know how long. And now you . . . ." 
   {op"}But no, on the contrary," he protested. {op"}I am very glad
you trust me. It's possible that later on I may . . ." 
   {op"}Yes, if you were to get ill," she interrupted eagerly,
{op"}or meet some bitter trouble, you would find I am not a useless
.p484
fool. You have only to let me know. I will come to you. I
will indeed. And I will stick to you. Misery and I are old
acquaintances{ -- }but this life here is worse than starving." 
   She paused anxiously, then in a voice for the first time
sounding really timid she added: 
   {op"}Or if you were engaged in some dangerous work. Sometimes
an humble companion . . . .  I would not want to know anything. I
would follow you with joy. I could carry out orders. I have
the courage." 
   Razumov looked attentively and the scared round eyes at
the withered, sallow, round cheeks. They were quivering about
the corners of the mouth. {op"}She wants to escape form here"
he thought.
   {op"}Suppose I were to tell you that I am engaged in dangerous
.p485
work," he uttered slowly. 
   She pressed the cat to her threadbare bosom with a
breathless exclamation.
   {op"}Ah!" Then not much above a whisper {op"}Under Peter
Ivanovitch?" 
   {op"}No, not under Peter Ivanovitch." 
   He read a scared admiration in her eyes and made an
effort to smile. 
   {op"}Then{ -- }alone?" 
   He held up his closed hand with the index raised. 
   {op"}Like this finger," he said. 
   She was trembling slightly. But it accurred to Razumov
that they might have been observed from the house holding this
.p486
long converse and he became anxious to be gone. She blinked
raising up to him her puckered face and seemed to beg mutely
to be told something more, to be given a word of encouragement
for her starving, grotesque and pathetic devotion. 
   {op"}Can we be seen from the house where we are?" asked
Razumov confidentially. 
   She answered without showing the slightest surprise at
the question. 
   {op"}No, we can't, on account of this end of the stables." 
   And she added with an acuteness which surprised Razumov: 
   {op"}But anybody looking out of an upstairs window would
know that you have not passed through the gates yet." 
   {op"}Who's likely to spy out of the window?" queried Razumov.
.p487
{op"}Peter Ivanovitch?" 
   She nodded. 
   {op"}Why should he trouble his head?" 
   {op"}He expects somebody this afternoon." 
   {op"}You know the person?" 
   {op"}There's more than one." 
   She had lowered her eyelids. Razumov looked at her
curiously. 
   {op"}Of course. You hear everything they say. 
   She murmured without animosity: 
   {op"}So do the tables and chairs." 
   He understood that the bitterness accumulated in the
heart of that helpless creature had got into her veins and
.p488
like some subtle poison had decomposed her fidelity to that
hateful pair. It was a great piece of luck for him, he reflected;
because women are seldom venal after the manner of men who
can be bought for material considerations. She would be
a good ally though it was not likely that
she was allowed to hear as much
as the tables and chairs of the Chateau Borel.
That could not be expected. But still . . . 
And at any rate she could be made to talk. 
   When she
looked up her eyes met the fixed stare of Razumov who
began to speak at once 
.p489
   {op"}Well, well dear . . . .  but upon my word I haven't the
pleasure of knowing your name yet. Isn't it strange?" 
   For the first time she had a movement of the shoulders. 
   {op"}Is it strange? No one is told my name. No one cares.
No one talks to me, no one writes to me. My parents don't
even know if I am alive. I have no use for a name and I have
almost forgotten it myself . . . . " 
   Rasumov murmured gravely: {op"}Yes, but still . . ." 
   She went on much slower and as if with indifference. 
   {op"}You may call me Tekla then. My poor Andrei called me
so. I was devoted to him. He lived in wretchedness and
suffering and died in misery. That is the lot of all us Russians,
.p490
nameless Russians. There is nothing else for us, and no hope
anywhere unless . . . ." 
   {op"}Unless what?" 
   {op"}Unless all these people with names are done away with,"
she finished blinking and pursing up her lips. 
   {op"}I will be easier to call you Tekla as you direct me,"
said Razumov, {op"}if you consent to call me Kirylo, when we are
talking like this{ -- }quietly{ -- }only you and me." 
   And he said to himself. {op"}Here's a being who must be
terribly afraid of the world else she would have run away from
this situation before." Then he reflected that the mere fact
of leaving the great man abruptly would make her suspect.
She could expect no support or countenance from anyone. This
.p491
revolutionist was not fit for an independent existence. 
   She moved with him a few
steps blinking and nursing the cat with a small balancing
movement of her arms. 
   {op"}Yes{ -- }only you and I. That's how I was with my poor
Andrei,{ -- }only he was dying, killed by these official brutes{ -- }while you! You are strong. You kill the monsters. You have
done a great deed. Peter Ivanovitch himself must consider you.
Well{ -- }don't forget me{ -- }especially if you were going back to
work in Russia. I could follow you carrying anything that was
wanted{ -- }at a distance, you know. Or I could watch for hours
at the corner of a street if necessary in wet or snow{ -- }yes I
could, all day long. I could write for you dangerous
.p492
documents, lists of instructions, so that in case of mischance
the handwriting could not compromise you. And you need not be
afraid if they were to catch me. I would know how to keep
dumb. We women are not so easily daunted by pain. I heard
Peter Ivanovitch say it is our blunt nerves or something. We
can stand it better. And it's true; I would just as soon
bite my tongue out and throw it at them as not. What's the
good of speech to me. Who would ever want to hear what I
could say? Ever since I closed the eyes of my poor Andrei I
haven't ever met a man who seemed to care for the sound of my
voice. I would never have spoken to you if the very first
time you appeared here you had not taken notice of me so
nicely. I could not help speaking of you to that charming
.p493
dear girl. Oh the sweet creature. And strong! One can see
that at once. If you have a heart don't let her ever set her
foot in here . . . .  Goodbye." 
   Razumov caught her by the arm. Her emotion at being thus
seized manifested itself by a short struggle, after which she
stood still not looking at him. 
   {op"}But you can tell me," he spoke in her ear, {op"}why they{ -- }these people in that house there, are so anxious to get hold
of her?" 
   She freed herself to turn upon him as if infuriated. 
   {op"}Don't you understand that Peter Ivanovitch must direct,
inspire, influence? It is the breath of his life. There can
be never too many disciples. He can't bear thinking of anyone
.p494
escaping him. And a woman too! There is nothing to be done
without women he says. He has written it. He{---}" 
   The young man was staring at her passion when she broke off
suddenly and ran away behind the stable.
.p494
{cn}III
{cop}Razumov thus left to himself took the direction of
the gate. But on this day of many conversations he discovered
that very probably he could not leave the grounds without having
to hold another one.
Stepping in view from beyond the lodge,
appeared the expected visitors of Peter Ivanovitch in
a small party composed of two men and a woman. They noticed
him too immediately and stopped short as if to consult. But
in a moment the woman moving aside motioned with her arm to the two men who
.p495
leaving the drive at once, struck across the large neglected
lawn or rather grassplot and made directly for the house. The
woman remained on the
path waiting for Razumov's approach. She had recognised
him. He too had recognised her at the first glance. He
had been made known to her in Zu{um}rich where he had broken
his journey while on his way from Dresden. They had been
much together for the three days of his stay. 
   She had on the very same costume in which he had seen her first. A blouse of crimson
silk made her noticeable at a distance. With that she
wore a short brown skirt and a leather belt. Her complexion
was the colour of coffee and milk but very clear; her eyes
black and glittering, her figure erect. A lot of thick hair,
.p496
nearly white was done up loosely under a dusty Tyrolese
hat of dark cloth, which seemed to have lost some of its
trimmings. 
   The expression of her face was grave, intent; so grave
that Razumov after approaching her close felt obliged to smile.
She greeted him with a
manly hand grasp. 
   {op"}What? Are Going away?" she exclaimed. {op"}How is that Razumov?" 
   {op"}I am going away because I haven't been asked to stay,"
Razumov answered returning the pressure of her hand with much
less force than she had put into it.
   She jerked her head sideways like one who understands.
.p497
Meantime Razumov's eyes had strayed after the two men. They
were crossing the grassplot obliquely, without haste, looking
straight before them at the house. The shorter of the two was
buttoned up in a narrow overcoat, of some thin grey
material, which came nearly to his heels. His companion much
taller and broader wore a short close fitting jacket and tight
trousers tucked into shabby top boots. 
   The woman who had sent them out of Razumov's way
apparently spoke in a business like voice. 
   {op"}I had to come rushing from Zu{um}rich on purpose to
meet the train and take these two along here to see Peter
Ivanovitch. I've just managed it." 
   {op"}Ah, indeed" Razumov said perfunctorily and very vexed at
.p498
her staying behind to talk to him. {op"}From Zu{um}rich{ -- }yes, of
course. And these two, they come from . . . . " 
   She interrupted, without emphasis:  
   {op"}From quite another direction. From a distance too. A
considerable distance." 
   Razumov shrugged his shoulders. The two men from a distance after
having reached the wall of the terrace disappeared suddenly
at its foot as if the earth had opened to swallow them up. 
   {op"}Oh well, they have just come from America." The woman
in the crimson blouse shrugged her shoulders too a little
before making that statement. {op"}The time is drawing near," she
interjected as if speaking to herself. {op"}I did not tell them
who you were. Yakovlitch would have wanted to embrace you." 
   {op"}Is that he with the wisp of hair hanging from his chin{ -- }
.p499
in the long coat? 
   {op"}You've guessed aright. That's Yakovlitch." 
   {op"}And they could not find their way here from the station
without you coming on purpose from Zu{um}rich to show it to them.
Verily without women we can do nothing. So it stands written
and apparently so it is." 
   He was conscious of an immense lassitude under his effort
to be sarcastic. And he could see that she had detected it
with those steady brilliant black eyes. 
   {op"}What is the matter with you?"
   {op"}I don't know. Nothing. I've had a devil of a day. All
day long . . . . " 
   She waited with her black eyes fixed on his face. Then:{ -- }
.p500
   {op"}What of that? You men are so impressionable and
self-conscious. One day is like another, hard, hard and there's an
end of it, till the great day comes. I came over for a very
good reason. They wrote to warn Peter Ivanovitch of their
arrival. But where from? Only from Cherbourg on a bit of
ship's note paper. Anybody could have done that. Yakovlitch has lived for years, and years
in America. I am the only one at hand who had known him well
in the old days. I knew him very well indeed. So Peter
Ivanovitch telegraphed asking me to come. It's natural enough
is it not?" 
   {op"}You came to vouch for his identity?" inquired Razumov. 
   {op"}Yes. Something of the kind. Fifteen years of a life
like his make changes in a man. Lonely like a crow in a
.p501
strange country. When I
think of Yakovlitch before he went to America. . . ."
   The softness in the low tone of these words caused
Razumov to glance at her sideways. The black eyes were
looking away; she had plunged the fingers of her right hand deep
into the mass of nearly white hair and stirred
them there absently. When she withdrew her hand the
little hat perched on top of her head remained slightly tilted
with a queer inquisitive effect, contrasting strongly with the
reminiscent murmur that escaped her. 
   {op"}We were not in our first youth even then. But a man is
a child always." 
   Razumov thought suddenly. {op"}They have been living
.p502
together." Then aloud: 
   {op"}Why didn't you follow him to America?" he asked point
blank. 
   She looked up at him with a perturbed air. 
   {op"}Don't you remember what was going on fifteen years ago?
It was a time of activity. The Revolution has its history by
this time. You are in it and yet you don't seem to know it.
Yakovlitch went away then on a mission; I went back to Russia.
It had to be so. Afterwards there was nothing for him to
come back to." 
   {op"}Ah indeed," muttered Razumov with affected surprise. {op"}Nothing!"
   {op"}What are you trying to insinuate?" she exclaimed quickly.
{op"}Well and what then if he did get discouraged a little . . . . " 
.p503
   {op"}He looks like a Yankee, with that goatee hanging from
his chin. A regular Uncle Sam," growled Razumov. {op"}Well, and
you? You who went to Russia? You did not get discouraged." 
   {op"}Never mind. Yakovlitch is a man who cannot be doubted.
He at any rate is the right sort." 
   Her black penetrating gaze remained fixed upon Razumov
while she spoke and for a moment afterwards. 
   {op"}Pardon me," Razumov inquired coldly. {op"}But does it mean
that you for instance think that I am {it}not{ro} the right sort?" 
   She made no protest, gave no sign
of having heard the question; she continued looking at him in
a manner which he judged not to be absolutely unfriendly. In
Zu{um}rich when he passed through she had taken him under her
.p504
charge, in a way, and was with him from morning till night
during his stay of two days. She took him round to see
several people. At first she talked to him a great deal and
rather unreservedly but always avoiding strictly any reference to herself;
towards the middle of the second day she fell silent,
attending him zealously as before, and even seeing him off at
the railway station where she pressed his hand firmly through
the lowered carriage window and stepping back without a word
waited till the train moved. He had noticed that she was
treated with quiet regard. He knew nothing of her parentage
nothing of her private history or political record; he
judged her from his own private points of view as being a
distinct danger in his path. Judged is not perhaps the right
.p505
word. It was more of a feeling, the summing up of slight
impressions aided by the discovery that he could not despise
her as he despised all the others. He had not expected to
see her again so soon. 
   No, decidedly; her expression was not
unfriendly. Yet he perceived an acceleration in the beat of his heart.
This conversation could not be abandoned at that point. He
went on in accent of scrupulous inquiry: 
   {op"}Is it perhaps because I don't seem to accept blindly
every development of the general doctrine{ -- }such for instance
as the feminism of our great Peter Ivanovitch? If that is
what makes me suspect them I can only say I would scorn to be
a slave even to an idea." 
.p506
   She had been looking at him all the time not as a
listener looks at one but as if his words he chose to say were only
of secondary interest. When he finished she slipped her hand
by a sudden and decided movement under his arm and impelled
him gently towards the gate of the grounds. He felt her
firmness and obeyed the impulsion at once just as the other two
men had a moment before obeyed unquestioningly the wave of
her hand. 
   They made a few steps like this. 
   {op"}No, Razumov, your ideas are probably all right," she
said. {op"}You may be valuable{ -- }very valuable. What's the
matter with you is that you don't like us." 
   She released him. He met her with a frosty smile. 
.p507
   {op"}Am I expected them to have love as well as convictions." 
   She shrugged her shoulders. 
   {op"}You know very well what I mean. People have been
thinking you not quite whole-hearted.
I have heard that opinion from one side
and another. But I have understood you at the end of the
first day . . . . " 
   Razumov interrupted her, speaking steadily. 
   {op"}I assure you that your perspicacity is at fault here." 
   {op"}What phrases he uses," she exclaimed parenthetically.
{op"}Ah! Kyrilo Sidorovitch you like other men are fastidious,
full of self love and afraid of trifles. Moreover you had no
training. What you want is to be taken in hand by some woman.
I am sorry I am not staying here a few days. I am going back
.p508
to Zu{um}rich tomorrow and shall take Yakovlitch with me most
likely." 
   This information relieved Razumov. 
   {op"}I am sorry too," he said. {op"}But all the same I don't
think you understand me." 
    She released his arm. He
breathed more freely; but at the last moment she asked: 
.p509
   {op"}And how did you hit it off with our Peter Ivanovitch?
You have seen a good deal of each other. How is it between
you two?" 
   Not knowing what answer to make the young man inclined
his head slowly. 
   Her lips had been parted in expectation. She pressed
them together, seemed to reflect. 
   {op"}That's all right." 
   This had a sound of finality but she did not leave him.
It was impossible to guess what she had in her mind. Razumov
muttered. 
   {op"}It is not me that you should have asked that question.
In a moment you shall see Peter Ivanovitch himself and the
.p510
subject will come up naturally. He will be curious to know
what has delayed you so long in this garden." 
   {op"}No doubt Peter Ivanovitch will have something to say to
me. Several things. He may even speak of you{ -- }Question me.
Peter Ivanovitch is inclined to trust me generally." 
   {op"}Question you? That's very likely." 
   She smiled half serious. 
   {op"}Well{ -- }and what shall I say to him?" 
   {op"}I don't know. You may tell him of your discovery." 
   {op"}What's that?" 
   {op"}Why{ -- }my lack of love for . . . . " 
   {op"}Oh! That's between ourselves," she interrupted, it was
.p511
hard to say whether in jest or earnest. 
   {op"}I see that you want to tell Peter Ivanovitch something
in my favour," said Razumov with grim playfulness. {op"}Well
then you could tell him that I am very much in earnest about
my mission. I mean to succeed." 
   {op"}You have been given a mission," she exclaimed quickly. 
   {op"}It amounts to that. I have been told to bring about a
certain event." 
   She looked at him searchingly. 
   {op"}A mission," she repeated very grave and interested all
at once. {op"}What sort of Mission?" 
   {op"}Something in the nature of propaganda work." 
.p512
   {op"}Ah! Far away from here?" 
   {op"}No. Not very far," said Razumov restraining a sudden
desire to laugh, though he did not feel joyous in the least. 
   {op"}So!" she said thoughtfully. {op"}Well, I am not asking
questions. It's sufficient that Peter Ivanovitch should know
what each of us is doing. Everything is bound to come right
in the end." 
   {op"}You think so?" 
   {op"}I don't think, young man. I just simply believe it." 
   {op"}And is it to Peter Ivanovitch that you owe that faith?" 
   She did not answer the question and they stood idle,
silent, as if reluctant to part from each other. 
.p513
   {op"}That's just like a man," she murmured, at last. {op"}As if it were
possible to tell how a belief comes to one." Her thin
Mephistofelian eyebrows moved sinuously a little. {op"}Truly
there are millions of
people in Russia who would envy the life of dogs in this
country. It is a horror and a shame to confess that even
between ourselves. One must believe
for very pity. This can't go on. No! It can't go on.
For twenty years I have been coming and going looking neither
to the left nor to the right . . . .  What are you smiling to
yourself for? You are only at the beginning. You have begun
.p514
well, but you just wait till you have trodden every particle
of yourself under your feet in your comings and goings. For
that is what it comes to. You've got to trample down every
particle of your own feelings; for to stop you cannot, you must
not. I have been young too . . .  but perhaps you think that
I am complaining{ -- }eh?" 
   {op"}I don't think anything of the sort," protested Razumov
indifferently. 
   {op"}I daresay you don't, you dear, superior creature. You
don't care." 
   She plunged her fingers into the bunch of hair on the
left side and that brusque movement had the effect of setting
.p515
the tyrolese hat straight on her head. She frowned under it
without animosity, in the manner of an investigator. Razumov
averted his face carelessly. 
   {op"}You men are all alike. You mistake luck for merit. You
do it in good faith too! I would not be too hard on you. It's
masculine nature. You men are ridiculously pitiful in
your aptitude to cherish childish illusions down to the very
grave. There is a lot of us who have been at work for fifteen
years{ -- }I mean constantly{ -- }trying one way after another, under-
ground and above ground, looking neither to the right nor to
the left! I can talk about it. I have been one of these
.p516
that never rested ...  There! What's the use of talking
Look at my grey hairs! And here two babies come along{ -- }
I mean you and Haldin{ -- }you come along and manage to strike
a blow at the first try." 
   At the name of Haldin falling from the rapid and
energetic lips of the woman revolutionist Razumov had the usual
brusque consciousness of the irrevocable. But in all the months
which had passed over his head he had become hardened to
the experience. The consciousness was no longer accompanied
by the blank dismay and the blind anger of the early days. He
had argued himself into new beliefs; and he had made for
himself a mental atmosphere of gloomy and sardonic reverie, a
sort of murky medium through which the event appeared like a
.p517
featureless shadow having vaguely the shape of a man, extremely
familiar yet utterly inexpressive, except for its air of
discreet waiting in the dusk. It was not alarming. 
   {op"}What was {it}he{ro} like?" the woman revolutionist asked unexpectedly. 
.p518
   {op"}What was he like" repeated Razumov making a painful
effort not to turn upon her savagely. But he relieved himself
by laughing a little while he stole a glance at
her out of the corners of his eyes. She looked disturbed 
by this reception of her inquiry.
   {op"}How like a woman," he went on. {op"}What is the good of
concerning yourself with his appearance. Whatever it was he is
removed beyond all feminine influences now." 
   A frown, making three folds at the root of her nose,
accentuated the Mephistofelian slant of her eyebrows. 
   {op"}You suffer Razumov" she suggested in her low confident voice. 
   {op"}What nonsense!" Razumov faced the woman fairly. {op"}But
now I think of it I am not sure that he is beyond the
influence of one woman at least. The one over there{ -- }Mme de S{---} 
.p519
you know. Formerly the dead were allowed to rest but now it
seems, they are at the beck and call of a crazy old
harridan. We revolutionists make wonderful discoveries. It
is true that they are not exactly our own. We have nothing of
our own. But couldn't the friend of Peter Ivanovitch satisfy your feminine curiosity.
Couldn't she conjure him up for you?{ -- }he jested like
a man in pain.
   Her concentrated frowning expression relaxed and she said
a little wearily: 
   {op"}Let us hope she will make an effort and conjure up some tea
for us. But that is by no means certain. I am tired Razumov." 
   {op"}You tired! What a confession! Well, there has been tea up
there. I had some. If you hurry on after Yakovlitch, instead of
wasting your time with such an unsatisfactory sceptical
.p520
person as myself, you may find the ghost of it{ -- }the cold ghost
of it{ -- }still lingering in the temple.
But as to you being tired, I can hardly believe
it. We are not supposed to be. We mustn't. We can't. The other
day I've read in some paper or other an alarmist article
on the tireless activity of the Revolutionary parties. It
impresses the world. It's our prestige." 
   {op"}He flings out continually these flouts and sneers," the
woman in the crimson blouse spoke as if appealing quietly to
a third person, but her black eyes never left Razumov's face.
{op"}And what for, pray? Simply because some of his conventional
notions are shocked, some of his petty masculine
standards. A true man's childishness! You might think he was one
.p521
of these nervous sensitives that come to a bad end. And yet"
she went on after a short reflective pause and changing the
mode of her address, {op"}and yet I know something which makes me think that you are a man of
character, Kirylo Sidorovitch. Yes! indeed{ -- }I know."  
   There was something mysteriously positive in this assertion which
startled Razumov. Their eyes met. He
looked away and, through the bars
of the rusty gate, stared at the clean wide road shaded by the
leafy trees. 
An electric tramcar quite empty, ran past the gate with
a metallic rustle. It seemed to him he would have given
anything to be sitting inside all alone. He was inexpressibly weary, weary
.p522
in every fibre of his body, but he had a reason for not being
the first to break off the conversation. It would not
be sound diplomacy. And there was his task{ -- }his ordeal.
At any instant, in the visionary and
criminal babble of revolutionists, some momentous words might
fall on his ear; from her lips, from anybody's lips. As
long as he managed to
preserve a clear mind and to keep down his irritability there
.p523
was nothing to fear. The only condition of success and safety
was indomitable will-power, he reminded himself.
   He longed to be on the other side of the bars as though he
were actually a prisoner within the grounds of this centre of
revolutionary plots of this house of
folly, of blindness, of villainy
and crime. Silently he indulged his wounded spirit in a
feeling of an immense moral and mental remoteness.
He did not even smile when he heard her repeat the words: 
   {op"}Yes! A strong character." 
   He continued to gaze through the bars like a moody
.p524
prisoner not thinking of escape but merely pondering upon the
faded memories of freedom. 
   {op"}If you don't look out," he mumbled, still looking away,
{op"}You shall certainly miss seeing as much as the mere ghost of
that tea." 
   She was not to be shaken off in such a way. As a matter
of fact he had not expected to succeed. 
   {op"}Never mind. It will be no great loss. I
mean the missing of her tea and only the ghost of it at that. As to
the lady you must understand that she has her positive uses. See {it}that{ro} Razumov."
   He turned his head at this imperative appeal and
saw the woman revolutionist making the motions of counting money into her
.p525
palm of her hand. 
   {op"}That's what it is. You see?" 
   Razumov uttered a slow {op"}I see" and returned to his
prisoner-like gazing upon the neat and shady road. 
   {op"}Material means must be obtained in some way and this is
easier than breaking into banks. More certain too. There!
I am joking . . . .  What is he muttering to himself now," she
cried under her breath. 
   {op"}My admiration of Peter Ivanovitch's devoted
self-sacrifice, that's all. It's enough to make one sick." 
   {op"}Oh you squeamish, masculine creature. Sick. Makes him
sick. And what do you know of the truth of it. There's no
.p526
looking into the secrets of the heart. Peter Ivanovitch knew
her years ago, in his worldly days when he was a young officer
in the guards. It is not for us to judge an inspired person.
That's where you men have an advantage. You are inspired
sometimes both in thought and action. I have always admitted that
when you {it}are{ro} inspired, when you manage to throw off
your masculine cowardice and prudishness you are not to be
equalled by us. Only, how seldom . . . .  Whereas the silliest
woman can always be made of use. And why? Because we have
passion, unappeasable passion . . . .  I should like to know what
he is smiling at?" 
   {op"}I am not smiling," protested Razumov gloomily. 
.p527
   {op"}Well! How is one to call it? You made some sort of
face. Yes I know! You men can love here and hate there and
desire something or other{ -- }and you make a great to-do about
it, and you call it passion! Yes! While it lasts. But we
women are in love with love, and with hate, with these very
things I tell you, and with desire itself. That's why we can't
be bribed off so easily as you men. In life,
you see, there is not much choice for one. You have
either to rot or to burn. And there is not one of us, painted
or unpainted that would not rather burn than rot." 
.p528
   She spoke with energy but in a matter of fact tone.
Razumov's attention had wandered away
on a track of its own{ -- }outside the bars of the gate{ -- }but not
out of earshot. He stuck his hands into
the pockets of his coat. 
   {op"}Rot or burn! Powerfully stated. Painted or unpainted.
Very vigorous. Painted or . . . .  Do tell me. She would be
infernally jealous of him, wouldn't she? 
   {op"}Who? What? The Baroness? Eleonor Maximovna? Jealous
of Peter Ivanovitch? Heavens! Are these the questions the
man's mind is running on? Such a thing is not to be
thought of." 
   {op"}Why? Can't a wealthy old woman be jealous? Or
.p529
are they all pure spirits together." 
   {op"}But what put it into your head to ask such a question?"
She wondered. 
   {op"}Nothing. I just asked. Masculine frivolity if you
like." 
   {op"}I don't like," she retorted at once. {op"}It is not the
time to be frivolous. What are you flinging your very heart
against? Or perhaps you are only playing a part." 
   Razumov had felt that woman's observation of him like a physical contact,
like a hand resting lightly on his shoulder. At that moment
he received the mysterious impression of her having made up
.p530
her mind for a closer grip. He stiffened himself inwardly to
to bear it without betraying
himself.
   {op"}Playing a part" he repeated presenting to her an unmoved profile
{op"}It must be done very badly since you see through the
assumption." 
   She watched him, her forehead drawn into perpendicular
folds, the thin black eyebrows diverging upwards like the
antennae{diagraph} of an insect. He added hardly audibly: 
   {op"}You are mistaken. I am doing it no more than the rest
of us." 
   {op"}Who is doing it?" she snapped out. 
   {op"}Who? Everybody", he said impatiently.
.p531
You are a materialist aren't you?" 
   {op"}Eh! My dear soul I have outlived all that nonsense." 
   {op"}But you must remember the definition of Cabanis: Man is
a digestive tube. I imagine now . . ." 
   {op"}I spit on him." 
   {op"}What? On Cabanis? All right. But you can't ignore
the importance of a good digestion. 
The joy of life{ -- }you know, the joy of
life? depends on a sound stomach; whereas a bad digestion
inclines one to scepticism, incredulity, breeds black fancies
and thoughts of death. These are facts ascertained by
physiologists. Well, I assure you, that ever since I came over from Russia
.p532
I have been stuffed with indigestible foreign concoctions of
the most nauseating kind{ -- }pan!" 
   {op"}You are joking," she murmured incredulously. He
assented in a detached way. 
   {op"}Yes. It is all a joke. It's hardly worth while talking
to a man like me. Yet for that very reason men have been
known to take their own life." 
   {op"}On the contrary, I think it {it}is{ro}worth while talking to
you." 
   He kept her in the corner of his eye. She had plunged
her fingers in the loose hair at the side of her head and was
stirring them thoughtfully. 
.p533
   She seemed to be thinking out some scathing retort but
ended by only shrugging her shoulders slightly. 
   {op"}Shallow talk! I suppose one must pardon this weakness
in you," she said putting a special accent on the last word.
There was something anxious in her indulgent conclusion. 
   Razumov noted the slightest shades in this conversation
which he had not expected, for which he was not prepared.
That was it. {op"}I was not prepared," he said to himself. {op"}It
has taken me unawares." It seemed to him that if he only
could allow himself to pant openly like a dog for a time, this
oppression would pass away. {op"}I shall never be found prepared,"
he thought with despair. He laughed a little, saying as
lightly as he could: 
.p534
   {op"}Thanks. I don't ask for mercy." Then affecting a
playful uneasiness: {op"}But aren't you afraid Peter Ivanovitch might
suspect us of plotting something unauthorised together by the
gate here?" 
   {op"}No, I am not afraid. You are quite safe from suspicions
while you are with me, my dear young man." The humourous
gleam in her black eyes went out. {op"}Peter Ivanovitch trusts
me," she went on quite austerely. {op"}He takes my advice. I
am his right hand, as it were, in certain most important
things.....  That amuses you{ -- }what? Do you think I am boasting?"
   {op"}God forbid. I was just only saying to myself that
Peter Ivanovitch seems to have solved the woman question pretty
completely." 
.p535
   Even as he spoke he reproached himself for his words,
for his tone. All day
long he had been saying the wrong things. It was folly, worse
than folly. It was weakness;
it was this disease of perversity
overcoming his will. Was this the way to meet speeches which
certainly contained the promise of future confidences from
that woman who apparently had a great store of secret knowledge
and so much influence. Why give her this puzzling
impression? But she did not seem inimical. There was no anger in
her voice. It was strangely speculative. 
   {op"}One does not know what to think Razumov. You must have
bitten something bitter in your cradle." 
.p536
   Razumov gave her a sidelong glance. 
   {op"}H'm. Something bitter? That's an explanation," he
muttered. {op"}Only it was much later. And don't you think Sophia
Semenovna that you and I come from the same cradle?" 
   The woman whose name he had forced himself at last to
pronounce (he had experienced a strong repugnance in letting
it pass his lips) the woman revolutionist murmured after a
pause: 
   {op"}You mean{ -- }Russia?" 
   He disdained even to nod. She seemed softened, her black
eyes very still, as though she were pursuing the simile in her
thoughts to all its tender associations. But suddenly she
knitted her brows in a Mephistofelian frown.
.p537
   {op"}Yes. Perhaps no wonder then. Yes. One lies there
lapped up in evils, watched over by beings that are worse
than ogres, ghouls, and vampires They must be driven away,
destroyed utterly. In regard of that task nothing else matters if men and women are
determined and faithful. That's how I came
to feel in the end. The great thing is not to quarrel amongst
ourselves about all sorts of conventional trifles. Remember
that Razumov." 
   Razumov was not listening. He had even lost the sense
of being watched in a sort of heavy tranquility. His
uneasiness, his exasperation, his scorn were blunted at last by all
.p538
these trying hours. It seemed to him that now they were blunted for ever. 
{op"}I am a match for
them all," he thought with a conviction too firm to be
exulting. The woman revolutionist had ceased speaking; he was not
looking at her; there was no one passing along the road. He
.p539
almost forgot that he was not alone; 
He heard her voice again curt, business-like
and yet betraying the hesitation which
had been the real reason of her prolonged silence. 
.p540
   {op"}I say Razumov!" 
   Razumov whose face was turned away from her made a grimace like
a man who hears a false note. 
   {op"}Tell me: is it true that on the very morning you actually attended the lectures at
the university?" 
   An appreciable fraction of a second elapsed before the
real import of the question reached him like a bullet which
strikes some time after the flash of the fired shot. Luckily
his disengaged hand was ready to grip a bar of the gate. He
held it with a terrible force but his presence of mind was gone.
.p541
He could make only a sort of gurgling
grumpy sound. 
   {op"}Come Kirylo Sidorovitch!" she urged him. {op"}I know you
are not a boastful man. {it}That {ro} one must say for you. You are
a silent man. Too silent perhaps. You are feeding on some
bitterness of your own. You are not an enthusiast. You are
perhaps all the stronger for that. But you might tell me.
One would like to understand you a little more. I was so
immensely struck . . .  Have you really done it?" 
   He got his voice back. The shot had
missed him. It had been fired at random
.p542
altogether, more like a signal for coming to close quarters.
It was to be a plain struggle for self-preservation.
And she was a dangerous adversary
too. But he was ready for battle; he was so ready that when
he turned towards her not a muscle of his face moved. 
   {op"}Certainly," he said without animation, secretly strung
up but perfectly sure of himself. {op"}Lectures{ -- }certainly. But
what makes you ask . . ." .   
   It was she who was animated. 
   {op"}I had it in a letter, written by a young man in
Petersburg; one of us of course. You were seen{ -- }you were
observed with your note book, impassible taking notes. . . . " 
   He enveloped her with his fixed stare. 
   {op"}What of that?" 
   {op"}I call such coolness superb{ -- }that's all. It is a proof
of uncommon strength of character. The young man writes
that nobody could have guessed from your face
and manner the part you had played only some two hours before
{ -- }the great momentous, glorious part . . . . " 
   {op"}Oh no. Nobody could have guessed," assented Razumov
gravely, {op"}because, don't you see, nobody at that time . . . . " 
   {op"}Yes, yes. But all the same you are a man of exceptional
fortitude it seems. You looked exactly as usual. It was
remembered afterwards with wonder . . . . " 
   {op"}It cost me no effort," Razumov declared with the same
staring gravity. 
.p544
   {op"}Then it's almost more wonderful still," she exclaimed
and fell silent while Razumov asked himself whether he had
not said there something utterly unnecessary{ -- }or even worse. 
   She raised her head eagerly. 
   {op"}Your intention was to stay in Russia. You had planned... " 
   {op"}No," interrupted Razumov without haste. {op"}I had made no
plans of any sort." 
   {op"}You just simply walked away?" she struck in. 
   He bowed his head in slow assent. {op"}Simply{ -- }yes." He
had gradually released his hold on the bar of the gate, as
though he had acquired the conviction that no random shot
could knock him over now. And suddenly he was inspired to
add {op"}The snow was coming down very thick, you know."
.p545
   She had a slight appreciative movement of the head, like
an expert in such enterprises, very interested, capable of
taking every point professionally. Razumov remembered
something he had heard. 
   {op"}I turned into a narrow side street, you understand," he
went on negligently and paused as if it were not worth
talking about. Then he remembered another detail and dropped it
before her, like a disdainful dole to her curiosity. 
   {op"}I felt inclined to lie down and go to sleep there." 
   She clicked her tongue at that sympton, very struck
indeed. Then:{ -- }
   {op"}But the note book! The amazing note book man. You
don't mean to say you had put it in your pocket beforehand!"
.p546
she cried. 
   Razumov gave a start. It might have been a sign of
impatience. 
   {op"}I went home. Straight home to my rooms," he said
distinctly. 
   {op"}The coolness of the man! You dared?" 
   {op"}Why not? I assure you I was perfectly calm. Ha! Calmer
than I am now perhaps." 
   {op"}I like you much better as you are now than when you
indulge that bitter vein of yours Razumov. And nobody in the
house saw you return{ -- }eh? That might have appeared queer." 
   {op"}No one," Razumov said firmly. {op"}Dvornik, landlady, girl,
all out of the way. I went up like a shadow. It was a murky
.p547
morning. The stairs were dark. I glided up like a phantom.
Fate? Luck? What do you think?" 
   {op"}I just see it!" The eyes of the woman revolutionist
snapped darkly. {op"}Well{ -- }and then you considered . . . . " 
   Razumov had it all ready in his head. 
   {op"}No. I looked at my watch, since you want to know.
There was just time. I took that notebook, and ran down the
stairs on
.p548
tip toe. Have you ever listened to the pit-pat of a man
running round and round the shaft of a deep staircase? They
have a gaslight at the bottom burning night and
day. I suppose it's gleaming down there now . . . .  The sound
dies out{ -- }the flame winks . . . . 
   He noticed the vacillation of surprise passing over the
steady curiosity of the black eyes fastened on his face as if
the woman revolutionist received the sound of his voice into
her pupils instead of her ears. He checked himself, passed
his hand over his forehead, confused like a man who had been
dreaming aloud.
   {op"}Where could a student be running if not to his lectures
.p549
in the morning. At night it's another matter. I did not care
if all the house had been there to look at me. But I don't
suppose there was anyone. It's best not to be seen or heard.
Aha! The people that are neither seen nor heard are the lucky
ones{ -- }in Russia. Don't you admire my luck?" 
   {op"}Astonishing" she said. {op"}If you have luck as well as
determination then indeed you are likely to turn out an
invaluable acquisition for the work in hand." 
   Her tone was earnest; and it seemed to Razumov that it
was speculative even as though she were already apportioning
him, in her mind, his share of the work. Her eyes were cast
down. He waited, not very alert now but with the grip of the
.p550
ever present danger giving him an air of attentive gravity.
Who could have written about him in that letter from
Petersburg? A fellow student surely{ -- }some imbecile victim of
revolutionary propaganda, some foolish slave of foreign,
subversive ideals. A long, famine-stricken, red-nosed figure
presented itself to his mental search. That must have been the
fellow! 
   He smiled inwardly at the absolute wrongheadedness of the
whole thing, the self deception of a criminal idealist
shattering his existence like a thunder-clap out of a clear sky
and re-echoing amongst the wreckage in the false assumptions
of those other fools. Fancy that hungry and piteous imbecile
furnishing to the curiosity of the revolutionist refugees this
.p551
utterly fantastic detail! He appreciated it as by no means
constituting a danger. On the contrary. As things stood it
was for his advantage rather, a piece of sinister luck which
had only to be accepted with proper caution. 
   {op"}And yet Razumov" he heard the musing voice of the woman
{op"}you have not the face of a lucky man." She raised her eyes
with renewed interest. {op"}And so that was the way of it. After
doing your work you simply walked off and made for your rooms.
That sort of thing succeeds sometimes. I suppose it was
agreed beforehand that once the business over each of you
would go his own way?" 
   Razumov preserved the seriousness of his expression and
the deliberate as if cautious manner of speaking. 
.p552
   {op"}Was not that the best thing to do?" he asked in a
dispassionate tone. {op"}And anyway" he added after waiting a
moment, {op"}we did not give much thought to what would come after.
We never discussed formally any line of conduct. It was
understood I think. 
   She approved his statement with slight nods. 
   {op"}You of course wished to remain in Russia?" 
   {op"}In St. Petersburg itself" emphasised Razumov. {op"}It was
the only safe course for me. And moreover I had nowhere else
to go." 
   {op"}Yes! Yes! I know. Clearly. And the other{ -- }this
wonderful Haldin appearing only to be regretted{ -- }you don't
know what he intended?"
.p553
   Razumov had foreseen that such a question would certainly
come to meet him sooner or later. He raised his hands a little
and let them fall helpless by his side{ -- }nothing more.
   It was the white haired woman conspirator who
was the first to break the silence. 
   {op"}Very curious" she pronounced slowly. {op"}And you did not
think Kirylo Sidorovitch that he might perhaps wish to get in
touch with you again?" 
   Razumov discovered that he could not suppress the
trembling of his lips. But he thought that he owed it to himself
to speak. A negative sign would not do again. Speak he must
.p554
if only to get to the bottom of what that Petersburg letter
might have contained. 
   {op"}I stayed at home next day" he said bending down a little
and plunging his glance into the black eyes of the woman so
that she should not observe the trembling of his lips. Yes I stayed
at home. As my actions are remembered and written about then
perhaps you are aware that I was {it}not {ro} seen at the lectures next
day. Eh? You didn't know? Well I stopped at home{ -- }the
live-long day." 
   As if moved by his agitated tone she murmured a
sympathetic {op"}I see! It must have been trying enough." 
   {op"}You seem to understand one's feelings" said Razumov
steadily. {op"}It was trying. It was horrible; it was an
.p555
atrocious day. It was not the last." 
   {op"}Yes, I understand. Afterwards when you heard they had got him.
Don't I know how one feels after losing a comrade in the good
fight. One's
ashamed of being left. And I can remember so many. Never
mind. They shall be avenged before long. And what is death!
At any rate it is not a shameful thing like some kinds of life." 
   Razumov felt something stir in his breast, a sort of
feeble and unpleasant tremor. 
   {op"}Some kinds of life" he repeated looking at her
searchingly. 
   {op"}The subservient, submissive life. Life! No!
Vegetation on the filthy heap of iniquity which the world is. Life
.p556
Razumov not to be vile must be a revolt{ -- }a pitiless protest{ -- }
all the time." 
   She calmed down, the gleam of suffused tears in her eyes
dried out instantly by the heat of her passion, and it was in
her capable business-like manner that she went on. 
   {op"}You understand me Razumov. You are not an enthusiast
but there is an immense force of revolt in you. I felt it
from the first, directly I set my eyes on you{ -- }you remember{ -- }
in Zurich. Oh! You are full of bitter revolt. That is good.
Indignation flags sometimes, revenge itself may become a
weariness, but that uncompromising sense of necessity and
justice which armed your and Haldin's hand to strike down that
fanatical brute ...  for it was that{ -- }nothing but that! I have
.p557
been thinking it out. It could have been nothing else but that." 
   Razumov made a slight bow the irony of which was
concealed by an almost sinister immobility of feature. 
   {op"}I can't speak for the dead. As for myself I can assure you
that my conduct was dictated by necessity and by the sense of
{ -- }well{ -- }retributive justice." 
   {op"}Good that" he said to himself while her eyes rested upon
him black and impenetrable like the mental caverns where
revolutionary thought should sit plotting the violent way of its
dream of changes. As if anything could be changed! In this
world of men nothing can be changed{ -- }neither happiness nor
misery. They can only be displaced at the cost of corrupted
consciences and broken lives{ -- }a futile game for arrogant
.p558
philosophers and sanguinary triflers. Those thoughts darted
through Razumov's head while he stood facing the old
revolutionary hand, the respected trusted and influential Sophia
Semenovna whose word had such a weight in the {op"}active" section
of every party. She was much more representative than the
great Peter Ivanovitch. Stripped of rhetoric, mysticism and
theories she was the true spirit of destructive revolution.
And she was the personal adversary he had to meet. It gave
him a feeling of hardly triumphant pleasure to deceive her out
of her own mouth. The epigramatic saying that speech has been
given to us for the purpose of concealing our thoughts came
into his mind. Of that cynical theory this was a very subtle
and a very scornful application, flouting in its own words the
.p559
very spirit of ruthless revolution, embodied in that woman
with her white hairs and black eyebrows, like slightly sinuous
lines of indian ink, traced upwards
from the two heavy perpendicular folds of a thoughtful frown. 
   {op"}That's it. Retributive. No pity" was the conclusion of
her silence. And this once broken she went on impulsively in
short vibrating sentences. {op"}Listen to me Razumov! ... "
   Her father was a clever but unlucky artisan. No joy had lighted
up his laborious days. He died at fifty all the
years of his life he had panted under the thumb of masters whose rapacity exacted
from him the price of the water, of the salt, of the very air he
breathed; taxed the sweat of his brow and claimed the blood of
his sons. No protection, no guidance! What had society to say
.p560
to him? Be submissive and be honest. If you rebel I shall
kill you. If you steal I shall imprison you. But if you
suffer I have nothing for you{ -- }nothing except perhaps a
beggarly dole of bread{ -- }but no consolation for your trouble,
no respect for your manhood, no pity for the sorrows of your
miserable life. 
   And so he laboured, he suffered and he died. He died in
the hospital. Standing by the common grave she thought of his
tormented life{ -- }she saw it whole. She reckoned the simple
joys of life, the brithright of the humblest, of which his
gentle heart had been robbed by the crime of a society which
nothing can absolve. 
   {op"}Yes Razumov" she went on in an impressive, lowered voice,
.p561
{op"}it was like a lurid light in which I stood still almost a
child and cursed not the toil, not the misery which had
been his lot, but the great social iniquity of the system
resting on unrequited toil and unpitied sufferings. From that
moment I was a revolutionist." 
   Razumov trying to raise himself
above the dangerous weaknesses of contempt or
compassion, had preserved an impassive countenance. She too stood
quiet before him and with an unexpected touch of mere bitterness
the first he could notice since he had come in contact with
the woman, she went on. 
   {op"}As I could not go to the church where the priests of the
.p562
system exhorted such unconsidered vermin as I to resignation I
went to the secret societies as soon as I knew how to find my
way. I was sixteen years old{ -- }no more Razumov! And{ -- }look
at my white hair." 
   In these last words there was neither pride nor sadness.
The bitterness too was gone. 
   {op"}And long! There is a lot of it. I had always
magnificent hair even as a chit of a girl. Only at that time we
were cutting it short and thinking that there was the first
step towards crushing the social infamy. Crush the infamy! A fine
watchword, I would placard it on the walls of prisons and
palaces, carve it on hard rocks, hang it out in letters of fire
on that empty sky for a sign of hope and terror{ -- }a portent
.p563
of the end . . . . 
   {op"}You are eloquent Sophia Semenovna" Razumov interrupted
suddenly. {op"}Only so far you seem to have been writing it in
water . . . ." 
   She was checked but not offended. {op"}Who knows? Very soon
it may become a fact written all over that great land of ours,"
she hinted meaningly. {op"}And then one would have lived long
enough. White hair wont matter." 
   Razumov looked at her white hair: and this mark of so many
uneasy years seemed nothing but a testimony to the invincible,
vigour of revolt. It threw out into an
astonishing relief the unwrinkled face, the brilliant black glance, the upright
compact figure, the simple, brisk, self possession of the mature
.p564
personality as though in her revolutionary pilgrimage she had
discovered the secret not of everlasting youth but of
everlasting endurance. 
   {op"}How un-Russian, she looks" thought Razumov. Her mother
might have been a Jewess or an Armenian or{ -- }devil knew what.
He reflected that a revolutionist is seldom true to the
settled type. All revolt is the expression of strong
individualism{ -- } ran his thought vaguely. One can tell them a mile
off in any society in any surroundings. It was astonishing
that the police . . . . 
   {op"}We shall not meet again very soon I think" she was
saying. {op"}I am leaving tomorrow." 
   {op"}For Zurich" Razumov asked casually but feeling relieved
.p565
not from any distinct apprehension but rather from a feeling
of stress as if after a wrestling match. That was over! 
   {op"}Yes, Zurcih{ -- }and further on perhaps; much further.
Another journey. When I think of all my journeys. The last
must come some day. Never mind Razumov. We had to have a
good long talk. I am glad we had it, like this, here,
unexpectedly. But I would have certainly tried to see you if we
had not met. Peter Ivanovitch knows where you live? Yes. I
meant to have asked him{ -- }but it's better like this. You see
we expect two more men; and I had much rather wait here with you
than up there at the house with. . . . " 
   Having cast a glance beyond the gate she interrupted
herself: {op"}Here they are" she said rapidly. {op"}Well Kirylo Sidorovitch
.p566
we shall have to say good bye."
.p566
{cn}Chapter IV
{cop}In his incertitude of the ground on which he stood Razumov
felt perturbed. Turning his head quickly he saw two men
arrested on the opposite side of the road. They were staring.
It looked as though they had been thus engaged for some time,
but seeing themselves noticed by Sophia Antonovna they crossed
the road at once and passed one after another through the
little gate for pedestrians by the side of the empty lodge
with its nailed door and boarded windows. They looked hard
at the stranger but without mistrust, the crimson blouse
making it all safe like a flaring signal on a dark walk. The
first, great white hairless face, double chin, prominent
stomach, which he seemed to carry forward consciously within
.p567
a strongly distended overcoat, only nodded and averted his eyes
peevishly; his companion lean, flushed cheek-bones, a
military red moustache below a sharp salient nose, approached at
once Sophia Semenovna, greeting her warmly. His voice was very
strong but inarticulate. It sounded like a deep buzzing. The
woman revolutionist was quietly cordial. Peter Ivanovitch
had summoned her too. No{ -- }She was not looking out for them
precisely. She had stopped for a talk . . . 
   {op"}This is Razumov" she announced in a clear voice. 
   The newcomer made an eager half turn. {op"}He will want to
embrace me" thought our young man with a deep recoil of all his
being while all his limbs seemed too heavy to move. But it was
a groundless alarm. He had to do now with a generation of
.p568
conspirators, which did not kiss each other on both cheeks;
and raising an arm that felt like lead he dropped his hand into
a largely-outstretched palm fleshless and hot as if dried up
by fever, giving a bony pressure, expressive, seeming to say:
between us there's no need of words. 
   The man with the red
moustache had clear wide-open eyes. Razumov fancied he could
see a smile behind their sadness. 
   {op"}This is Razumov" Sophia Semenovna repeated loudly for
the benefit of the fat man who motionless at some distance
displayed the profile of his stomach, with his enormous thick
hands hanging down lifelessly. 
   No one moved. Everything, sounds, attitudes, movements
.p569
and immobility seemed to be part of an experiment, whose
result was a thin voice piping with comic peevishness. 
   {op"}O, yes! Razumov. We have been hearing of nothing but
Mr. Razumov for months. For my part I confess I would rather
have seen Haldin on this spot instead of Mr. Razumov." 
   The squeaky stress put on the name {op"}Razumov{ -- }Mr. Razumov"
pierced the ear ridiculously like the falsetto of a circus
clown firing off the beginning of an elaborate joke.
Astonishment was Razumov's first response, followed by a sudden
giddiness that lifted him up into an illusion of a great height.
.p570
From this dangerous
eminence he heard the other two exclaiming, then found himself down
amongst them without a shock and within range of the voices. 
   {op"}What's the meaning of this" he asked in a stern tone,
feeling the ground firm under his feet. 
   {op"}Tut. Silliness. He's always like that." Sofia
Semenovna was obviously vexed. But she dropped the explanation{ -- }
{op"}Necator" from her lips casually, just loud enough to be heard
by Razumov. The abrupt squeaks of the fat man seemed to
proceed from that thing like a balloon he carried under his
overcoat. The stolidity of his attitude, the big feet,
the lifeless, hanging hand, the enormous bloodless cheek, the
thin wisps of hair straggling down the fat nape of the neck,
.p571
fascinated Razumov into a stare on the verge of horror and
laughter. 
   Nikita surnamed Necator, with a sinister aptness of
alliteration! Ra zumov had heard of him. He had heard so much since
crossing the frontier, of these celebrities of the militant
revolution: the legends, the stories, the authentic chronicle
which now and then peeps out before a half-incredulous world.
Razumov had heard of him. He was supposed to have killed more
gendarmes and police agents than any revolutionist living. He
had been entrusted with executions. That paper with the letters
N.N. the very pseudonym of murder found pinned on the stabbed
breast of a certain notorious spy (that picturesque detail
of a sensational murder case had got into the newspapers) was
.p572
the mark of his handiwork. {op"}By order of the Committee. N.N."
A corner of the curtain lifted to strike the imagination of the
gaping world. He was said to have been innumerable times in
and out of Russia, the Necator of busaucrats, of provincial
governors, of obscure informers. He lived between whiles, Razumov
had heard, on the shores of the Lake of Como with a charming
wife devoted to the cause and two young children. But how that
creature so grotesque as to set all the town dogs barking at
its mere sight could go about on those deadly errands and slip
through the meshes of the police? 
   {op"}What now, what now" the voice squeaked. {op"}I am only
sincere. It's not denied that the other was the originator, the
leading spirit? Well it would have been better if he had been
.p573
the one spared to us. More useful. I am not a sentimentalist
. .  Say what I think. . . .  Only natural." 
   Squeak, squeak, squeak without a 
.p574
a gesture, without a stir{ -- }the horrible squeaky burlesque of
professional jealousy{ -- }this man of a sinister alliterative
nickname, this executioner of revolutionary verdicts, the
terrifying {it}N.N.{ro} exasperated like a fashionable tenor by the
attention attracted to the performance of an obscure amateur. Sofia
Semenovna shrugged her shoulders. The comrade with the
martial red moustache hurried towards Razumov full of conciliatory
intentions in his strong buzzing voice. 
   {op"}Devil take it. And in this place too, in the public
street so to speak. But you can see yourself how it is. One
of his fantastic sallies. Absolutely of no consequence." 
   {op"}Pray don't concern yourself" cried Razumov going off into
a long fit of laughter. {op"}Don't mention it."
.p575
   The other{ -- }his hectic flush crimson like a pair of burns
on his cheek bones, stared for a
moment and suddenly burst out laughing too. Razumov, whose
hilarity died out all at once, made a step forward. 
   {op"}Enough of this" he began in a clear incisive
voice though he had discovered that he could hardly control
the trembling of his legs. {op"}I will have no more of it. I
shall not permit anyone . . . .  I can see very well what you
are at with those allusions. . . .  Inquire, investigate! I defy you but I will not be played with."
    He had heard these words before. He had been driven to
cry them out in the face of other suspicions. It was an
infernal cycle bringing round that protest like a fatal
.p576
necessity of his existence. But it was no use. He would be
always played with. Luckily life does not last for ever. 
   {op"}I wont have it" he shouted striking his fist into the
palm of his other hand. 
   {op"}Kirylo Sidorovitch{ -- }what has come to you?" The woman
revolutionist interfered with authority. They were all
looking at Razumov now, each as this fierce outburst had found them
in a scattered group; only the slayer of spies and gendarmes
had turned about presenting his enormous stomach in full,
like a shield. 
   {op"}Don't shout. There are people passing." Sofia Semenovna
was apprehensive of another outburst. A steam launch from
.p577
Monrepos side had come to the landing stage across the road,
its hoarse, whistle, and the churning noise alongside all
unnoticed, had landed a small bunch of local passengers who
were dispersing their several ways. Only a specimen of early
tourist in knickerbockers, conspicuous by a brand new yellow
leather glass case, hung about for a moment scenting something
unusual about these four people within the rusty iron gates of
what looked the grounds run wild of an unoccupied private
house. Ah! If he had only known what the chance of 
commonplace travelling had suddenly put in his way! 
But he was a
well bred person; he averted his gaze and moved off with
short steps along the side alley, on the watch for a tramcar. 
   A gesture from Sofia Semenovna {op"}Leave him to me" had sent
.p578
the two men away{ -- }the buzzing of the inarticulate 
voice growing fainter
and fainter, and the thin pipe of {op"}What now!
What now" reduced to the proportions of a squeaking toy by
the distance. They had left him to her. So many things could
be left safely to the experience of Sofia Semenovna. And, at
once, her black eyes turned to Razumov, her mind
tried to get at the heart of that outburst. It had some
meaning. No one is born an active revolutionist.
The change comes disturbingly with the force of a sudden
vocation bringing in its train the agonizing doubts of a
renegade and the assertive violences of a convert, an
unstable state of the soul, till the final appeasement in a
perfect fierceness of conviction. She had seen{ -- }often had
.p579
only divined{ -- }scores of these young men and young women,
going through an emotional crisis. This young man looked like
a moody egotist. And besides it was a special{ -- }an unique
case. There was something cautious in the tone of her warning
speech. 
   {op"}Take care Razumov my good friend. If you carry on like
this you will go mad. You are angry with everybody and bitter
with yourself and on the look out for something to torment
yourself with . . ." 
   {op"}It's intolerable!" Razumov could only speak in gasps. 
{op"}You must admit that I can have no illusions on the attitude . . 
which . . .  It isn't clear . . .  or rather . . .  only too clear." 
   Here his voice failed him altogether, and he made a gesture
.p580
of despair. For it was not his courage that failed him. The
choking fumes of falsehood had taken him by the throat{ -- }
the thought of being condemned to struggle on and on in that
tainted atmosphere without the hope of ever renewing his
strength by a breath of fresh air. 
   {op"}A glass of cold water is what you want." Sofia Semenovna
glanced up the grounds at the house and shook her head, then
out of the gate at the brimful placidity of the lake. With a
half-comical shrug of the shoulders she gave the remedy up in
the face of that abundance. 
   {op"}It is you my dear soul who are flinging yourself at
something which does not exist. What is it? Self-reproach{ -- }or
what? It's absurd. You couldn't have gone and given yourself
.p581
up because he was taken." 
   She spoke reasonably, at some length too. Razumov had
nothing to complain of in his reception. Everybody was
discussed more or less. Everybody had to be thoroughly
understood before being accepted. No one that she could remember
had been shown from the first so much confidence. Soon, very
soon, perhaps sooner than he expected he would be given an
opportunity to show his devotion to the sacred task of crushing
the Infamy. 
   Razumov listening, quietly thought: {op"}It may be that she is
trying to lull my suspicions to sleep. On the other hand its
obvious that most of them are fools." He moved aside a
couple of paces and folding his arms on his breast leaned back
.p582
against the stone pillar of the gate. 
   {op"}As to what remains obscure in the fate of that poor
Haldin . . .  Sophia Semenovna dropped into a slowness of
utterance which was to Razumov like the falling of molten lead drop
by drop. {op"}As to that{ -- }though no one ever hinted that either
from fear or neglect your conduct has not been what it should
have been{ -- }well I have a bit of intelligence. . . . 
   Razumov could not prevent himself from raising his head, and
Sophia Semenovna nodded slightly.
{op"}I have. You remember that letter from Petersburg." 
   {op"}The letter? Perfectly. Some busybody has been reporting
my conduct on a certain day. It's rather sickening. I
suppose our police is greatly edified when they open these interesting
and{ -- }and{ -- }superfluous letters." 
.p583
   {op"}Oh dear, no! The police does not get hold of our letters
so easily as you imagine. As to the letter in question that
did not leave Petersburg till the ice broke up. It went by the first
English steamer which left the Neva this Spring. They have a
fireman on board{ -- }one of us in fact. It has reached me from
Hull . . ." 
   She paused as if she were surprised at the sullen fixity
of Razumov's gaze, but went on at once and much faster. 
   {op"}We have some of our people there who . . . . but never mind.
The writer of the letter relates an incident which he
thinks may possibly be connected with Haldin's arrest. I was
just going to tell you when those two men came along." 
   {op"}That also was an incident" muttered Razumov, {op"}of a very
.p584
charming kind{ -- }for me." 
   {op"}Leave off that" cried Sophia Semenovna. {op"}Nobody cares
for Nikita's barking. There's no malice in him. Listen to
what I have to say. You may be able to throw a light. There
was in Petersburg a sort of town peasant{ -- }a man who owned
horses. He came to town years ago
to work for some relation, as a driver and ended
by owning a cab or two . . ." 
   She might well have spared herself the slight effort of
the gesture. {op"}Wait!". . Razumov could not have interrupted her
now, not to save his life. The slight contraction of his
facial muscles had been unvoluntary a mere surface stir
leaving him sullenly attentive as before. 
.p585
   {op"}He was not a quite ordinary man of his class{ -- }it seems.
The people of the house{ -- }my informant talked with many of
them{ -- }you know, one of these enormous houses of shame and
misery. . . ." Sophia Semenovna need not have enlarged on the
character of the house, Razumov saw clearly towering at her back
a dark mass of masonry veiled in snow flakes with the long row
of windows of the eating shop shining greasily very near the
ground. The ghost of that night pursued him. He stood up
to it with rage and with weariness. 
   {op"}Did the late Haldin ever by chance speak to you of that
house?" Sophia Semenovna was anxious to know. 
   {op"}Yes." Razumov making that answer wondered whether he
were falling into a trap. It was so humiliating to lie to these
.p586
people that he probably could not have said no. {op"}He mentioned
to me once" he added as if making an effort of memory, {op"}a
house of that sort. He used to visit some workmen there." 
   {op"}Exactly." 
   Sophia Semenovna triumphed. Her correspondent had
discovered that fact quite accidentally through the talk of the 
people of the house, having made friends with a workman who
occupied a room there. They described Haldin's
appearance perfectly. He brought comforting words of hope into their
misery. He came irregularly but he came very often; and{ -- }
her correspondent wrote{ -- }sometimes he
spent a night in the house sleeping, they thought, in a stable
which opened upon the inner yard. 
.p587
   {op"}Note that Razumov! In a stable." 
   Razumov had listened with a sort of ferocious but amused
acquiescence. 
   {op"}Yes. In the straw. It was probably the cleanest spot
in the whole house." 
   {op"}No doubt" assented the woman with that deep frown which
seemed to draw closer together her black eyes in a sinister
fashion. No four footed beast could stand the filth and
wretchedness so many human beings were condemned to suffer
from in Russia. The point of this discovery was that it
proved Haldin to have been familiar with that horse-owning
peasant{ -- }a reckless, independent, free living, fellow not
much liked by the other inhabitants of the house. He was
.p588
believed to have been the associate of a band of housebreakers.
Some of these got captured. Not while he was driving them
however but still there was a suspicion against th fellow of
having given a hint to the police and . . . . 
   The woman revolutionist checked herself suddenly. 
   {op"}And you? Have you ever heard your friend refer to a
certain Ziemianitch?" 
   Razumov was ready for the name. He had been looking out
for the question. {op"}When it comes I shall own up" he had said
to himself. But he took his time. 
   {op"}To be sure!" he began slowly. Ziemianitch{ -- }a peasant
owning a team of horses. Yes. On one occasion. Ziemianitch!
Certainly! Ziemianitch of the horses . . .  How could it have
.p589
slipped my memory like this! One of the last conversations we
have had together." 
   {op"}That means" Sophia Semenovna looked very grave. {op"}That
means Razumov it was very shortly before{ -- }eh?" 
   {op"}Before what!" shouted Razumov advancing at the woman who
looked astonished but stood her ground. {op"}Before{ -- }Oh! Of
course, it was before! How could it have been after? , Only a
few hours before." 
   {op"}And favourably?" 
   {op"}With enthusiasm! The horses of Ziemianitch! The free
soul of Ziemianitch." 
   Razumov took a savage delight in the loud utterance of
that name which had never before crossed his lips audibly.
He fixed his blazing eyes on the woman till at last her
.p590
fascinated expression recalled him to himself. 
   {op"}The late Haldin" he said, holding himself in, with 
downcast eyes, {op"}was inclined to take sudden fancies to people, on
{ -- }what shall I say{ -- }insufficient grounds." 
   {op"}There!" Sophia Semenovna clapped her hands. {op"}That to
my mind settles it. The suspicions of my correspondent were
aroused. . . ." 
   {op"}Aha! Your correspondent" Razumov said in an almost
openly mocking tone. {op"}What suspicions? How aroused?{ -- }by this
Ziemianitch. Probably some drunken, gabbling, plausible . . . ." 
   {op"}You talk as if you had known him." 
   Razumov looked up. 
   {op"}No. But I knew Haldin." 
.p591
   Sophia Semenovna nodded gravely 
   {op"}I see. Every word you say confirms to my mind the
suspicion communicated to me in that very interesting letter.
This Ziemianitch was found one morning hanging from a hook in
the stable." 
   Razumov felt a profound trouble. It was visible,
because Sophia Semenovna was moved to observe vivaciously. 
   {op"}Aha! You begin to see." 
   He saw it clearly enough{ -- }in the light of a lantern
casting spokes of shadow in a cellar-like stable the body in
a sheepskin coat and long boots hanging against the wall. A
pointed hood with the ends wound about up to the eyes hid the
face. {op"}But that does not concern me" he reflected. {op"}It does
.p592
not affect my position at all. He never knew who had thrashed
him. He could not have known." Razumov felt sorry for the
old lover of the bottle and women. 
   {op"}Yes. Some of them end like that" he muttered. {op"}What is
your idea Sophia Antonovna?" 
   It was the idea of her correspondent. Sophia Antonovna
had adopted it fully. She stated in in one word{ -- }{op"}Remorse".
Razumov opened his eyes very wide at that. Sophia Antonovna's
informant by listening to the talk of the house, by putting
this and that together had managed to come very near to the
truth of Haldin's relation to Ziemianitch. 
   {op"}It is I who can tell you what you were not certain of{ -- }
that your friend had some plan for saving himself afterwards,
.p593
for getting out of Petersburg at any rate. Perhaps that and
no more{ -- }trusting to luck for the rest. And that fellow's
horses were part of the plan." 
   {op"}They have actually got at the truth" Razumov marvelled
to himself while he nodded judicially. {op"}Yes, that's possible,
very possible." But the woman revolutionist was very positive.
First of all a conversation about horses between Haldin and
Ziemianitch had been partly overheard. Then there were the
suspicions of the people in the house when their {op"}young
gentleman" (they did not know Haldin by his name) ceased to call at
the house. Some of them used to charge Ziemianitch with
knowing something of it. He denied it with exasperation; but the
fact was that ever since Haldin's disappearance he was not
.p594
himself, growing moody and thin. Finally during a quarrel,
with some woman (to whom he was making up) in which most of
the inmates of the house were mixed up apparently he was openly
abused by his chief enemy an athletic pedlar, for having
driven {op"}our young gentleman to Siberia the same as you did
those young fellows who broke into houses." It seems there was
a fight in the end and Ziemianitch got flung down a flight of stairs.
Thereupon he drank and moped for a week and then hanged
himself. 
   Sophia Antonovna drew her conclusions from the tale.
Either drunken indiscretion as to a driving job on a certain
date{ -- }overheard by some spy in some low grog-shop{ -- }perhaps
in the very eating shop on the ground floor of the house{ -- }or,
.p595
who knows, just a downright denunciation{ -- }then remorse. A
man like that would be capable of anything. People said he
was a flighty old chap. And if he had been once before mixed
up with the police{ -- }as seemed certain though he always denied
it{ -- }in connection with these thieves, he would be sure to
be acquainted with some police underlings, always on the
look out for something to report. Possibly at first his tale
was not made anything of till the day that scoundrel de P{---} 
got his deserts. Ah! But then every bit and scrap of hint
and information would be acted on and fatally they were bound
to get Haldin. 
   Sophia Antonovna spread out her hands{ -- }{op"}Fatally". 
   Fatality{ -- }chance! Razumov meditated in silent
.p596
astonishment upon the queer verisimilitude of these inferences. They
were obviously to his advantage. 
   {op"}It is right now to make this conclusive evidence known
generally." Sophia Antonovna was very calm and deliberate
again. She had received the letter three days ago; but did 
not write at once to Peter Ivanovitch. She knew then that she
would have the opportunity presently of meeting several men of
action assembled for an important purpose. 
   {op"}I thought it would be more effective like that. I could
show the letter itself at large. I have it in my pocket now.
You understand how pleased I was to come upon you." 
   Razumov was saying to himself: She won't offer to show
the letter to me. Not likely. Has she told me everything
.p596
that correspondent of hers has found out? . .  He would have
liked to see the letter but he felt he must not ask. 
   {op"}Tell me please was this an investigation ordered as it
were . . ." 
   {op"}No, no{---}" she protested. {op"}There you are again with your
sensitiveness. It makes you stupid. Don't you see there
was no starting point for an investigation even if anyone had
thought of it. A perfect blank! That's exactly what some
people were pointing out as the reason for receiving you
cautiously. It was all perfectly accidental arising from my
informant striking an acquaintance with an intelligent skin
dresser lodging in that particular slum-house. A wonderful
coincidence!" 
.p598
   {op"}A pious person" suggested Razumov with a pale smile,
{op"}would say that the hand of God has done it all." 
   {op"}My poor father would have said that." Sophia Antonovna
did not smile. She dropped her eyes. {op"}Not that his God ever
helped him. It's a long time since God has done anything for
the people. Anyway it's done." 
   {op"}All this would be quite final" said Razumov with every
appearance of reflective impartiality, {op"}if there was any
certitude that the {op"}our young gentleman" of these people was
Victor Haldin. Have we got that?" 
   {op"}Yes. There's no mistake. My correspondent was as
familiar with Haldin's personal appearance as with your
.p599
own" the woman affirmed decisively. 
   {op"}It's the red-nosed fellow beyond a doubt" Razumov said
to himself with re-awakened uneasiness. Had his own visit to
that accursed house passed unnoticed? It was barely possible.
Yet it was hardly probable. It was just the right sort of
food for the popular gossip that gaunt busy-body had been
picking up. But the letter did not seem to contain any
allusion to that. Unless she had suppressed it. And if so{ -- }why?
If it had really escaped the prying of that hunger-stricken
democrat with a confounded genius for recognising people from
description{ -- }it could be only for a time. He would come upon
it presently and hasten to write another letter{ -- }and then! 
   For all the envenomed recklessness of his temper fed on
.p600
hate and disdain Razumov shuddered inwardly. It guarded him
from common fear but it could not defend him from disgust at
being dealt with in any way by these people. It was a sort
of superstitious dread. Now since his position had been made
more secure by their own folly at the cost of Ziemianitch he
felt the need of perfect safety, with its freedom from direct
lying, with its power of moving amongst them silent,
unquestioning, listening, impenetrable, like the very fate of their
crimes and their folly. Was this advantage his already? Or not yet?
Or never would be?" 
   {op"}Well Sophia Antonovna{---}" his air of reluctant
concession was genuine in so far that he was really loth to part with
her without testing her sincerity by a question it was
.p601
impossible to bring about in any way{ -- }{op"}well Sophia Antonovna
if that is so then . . ." 
   {op"}The creature has done justice to himself" the woman
observed as if thinking aloud. 
   {op"}What? Ah, yes! Remorse" Razumov muttered with
equivocal contempt. 
   {op"}Don't be harsh Kirylo Sidorovitch if you have lost a
friend." There was no hint of softness in her tone only the
black glitter of her eyes seemed detached for an instant from
vengeful visions. {op"}He was a man of the people. The simple
Russian soul is never wholly impenitent. It's something to
know that." 
   {op"}Consoling?" insinuated Razumov in a tone of enquiry. 
   {op"}Don't rail" she checked him sharply. {op"}Remember Razumov
.p602
that women, children and revolutionists hate irony which is the
negation of all saving instincts, of all faith, of all devotion,
of all action. Don't rail! Don't . . . .  I don't know how it
is but there are moments when you are abhorrent to me. . . ." 
   She averted her face. A languid silence as if all the
electricity of the situation had been discharged 
in this flash of passion lasted
for some time. Razumov had not flinched. Suddenly she laid
the tips of her fingers on his sleeve. 
   {op"}Don't mind." 
   {op"}I don't mind" he said very quietly. 
   He was proud to feel that she could read nothing on his
face. 2He was really mollified, relieved if only for a moment
from an obscure oppression. And suddenly he asked himself: Why
.p603
the devil did I go to that House? It was an imbecile thing
to do. 
   A profound disgust came over him. Sophia Antonovna
lingered talking in a friendly manner with an evident conciliatory
intention. And it was still about the famous letter,
referring to various minute details given by her informant. That last
had never seen Ziemianitch. The {op"}victim of remorse" had been
buried several weeks before her correspondent began frequenting
the house. It{ -- }the house{ -- }contained very good revolutionary
material. The spirit of the heroic Haldin had passed through
these dens of black misery with a promise of universal
redemption from all the miseries that oppress mankind. Razumov
listened without hearing gnawed by the newborn desire of safety
.p604
with its independence from that degrading method of direct
lying which at times he found it almost impossible to
practice. 
   No. The point he wanted to hear about could never come
into this conversation. There was no way of bringing it
forward. He regretted not having composed a perfect story, for
use abroad, in which his fatal connection with the house might
have been owned up to. But he did not know then that
Ziemianitch had hanged himself. And anyway who could have foreseen
this woman's {op"}informant" stumbling upon that particular slum,
of all the slums awaiting destruction in the purifying flame
of social revolution. Who could have foreseen. Nobody! {op"}It's
a perfectly diabolic surprise" thought Razumov, calm faced in
.p605
his attitude of inscrutable superiority nodding assent to
Sophia Antonovna's remarks upon the psychology of the {op"}people". 
{op"}Oh yes"{ -- }{op"}certainly"{ -- }rather coldly but with a nervous
longing in his fingers to tear some sort of confession out of
her throat. 
   Then at the very last, on the point of separating, the
feeling of relaxed tension already upon him, he heard Sophia
Antonovna allude to the subject of his uneasiness. How it
came about he could only guess, his mind being absent at the
moment, but it must have sprung from Sophia Antonovna's
complaint about the illogical absurdity of the people. For
instance{ -- }that Ziemianitch was looked upon as notoriously
irreligious and yet in the last weeks of his life he suffered
.p606
from the notion that he had been beaten by the devil." 
   {op"}The devil" repeated Razumov as though he had not heard 
aright. 
   {op"}The actual Devil. The Devil in person. You may well
look astonished Kirylo Sidorovitch. Early on the very night
poor Haldin was taken, a complete stranger turned up and gave
Ziemianitch a most fearful thrashing while he was lying dead
drunk in the stable. He was barely able to crawl about for the next
few days. The wretched creature's body was one mass of
bruises. He showed it to the people in the house." 
   {op"}But you Sophia Antonovna, you don't believe in the actual
devil?" 
   {op"}Do you?" retorted the woman curtly. {op"}Not but that there
.p607
are plenty of men worse than devils to make a hell of this earth"
she muttered to herself. 
   Razumov watched her, vigorous and white haired with the
deep fold between her thin eyebrows and her black glance
turned idly away. It was obvious that she did not make much
of the story{ -- }unless indeed this was the perfection of
duplicity. . . .  {op"}A dark young man" she explained further. 
{op"}Never
seen there before, never seen afterwards. Why are you smiling
Razumov?" 
   {op"}At the devil being still young after all these ages" he
answered composedly. {op"}But who was able to describe him since
the victim, you say, was dead drunk at the time." 
   {op"}Oh! The eating-house keeper has described him. An
.p608
overbearing, swarthy young man in a student's cloak, who came
rushing in, demanded Ziemianitch, beat him furiously and
rushed away without a word, leaving the eating house keeper
paralysed with astonishment. 
   {op"}Does he too believe it was the devil?" 
   {op"}That I can't say. I am told he's very reserved on the
matter. Those sellers of spirits are great scoundrels
generally. I should think he knows more of it than anybody." 
   {op"}Well{ -- }and you Sophia Antonovna what's your theory?"
asked Razumov in a tone of great interest. {op"}Yours and your
informant's, who is on the spot." 
   {op"}I agree with him. Some police-hound in disguise. Who
else would beat a helpless man so unmercifully? As for the
.p609
rest, if they were out that day on every trail old and new it
is probable enough that they might have thought it just as
well to have Ziemianitch at hand for more information or for
identification or what not. Some scoundrelly detective 
was sent to fetch
him along and being vexed at finding him so drunk broke
a stable-fork over his ribs. Later on, after they
had the big game safe in the net they troubled their heads no
more about that peasant." 
   Such were the last words of the woman revolutionist in
this conversation keeping so close to the truth, departing
from it so far in the verisimilitude of thoughts and
conclusions as to give one the notion of the invincible nature of
human error, a glimpse into the utmost depths of self deception.
.p610
Razumov after shaking hands with Sophia Semenovna 
left the grounds, crossed the road and walking
out on the little steamboat pier leaned over the rail. 
.p611
   His mind was at ease such as he had not known for many
days, ever since that night. . . .  the night. The conversation
with the woman revolutionist taking that unexpected turn had
given him the view of his danger at the very moment
this danger vanished, characteristically enough. {op"}I ought to
have foreseen the doubts that would arise in those people's
minds" he thought. Then his attention being attracted by a
stone of peculiar shape which he could see clearly lying at the
bottom he began to speculate as to the depth of water in that
spot. But very soon with a start of wonder at this
extraordinary instance of ill timed detachment he returned to his train
of thought. {op"}I ought to have told very circumstantial lies
from the first" he said to himself with a mortal distaste of
.p612
the mere idea which silenced his mental utterance for quite
a perceptible interval. {op"}Luckily that's all right now" he
reflected and after a time spoke to himself half aloud. {op"}Thanks
to the devil.", and laughed a little. 
   The end of Ziemianitch then arrested his wandering thoughts.
He was not exactly amused at the interpretation
but he could not help detecting in it a certain piquancy.
He owned to himself that had he known of that suicide before
leaving Russia, he would have been incapable of making such
excellent use of it for his own purposes. He should have
felt infinitely obliged to the fellow with the red nose for
his patience and ingenuity. {op"}A wonderful psychologist
apparently" he said to himself sarcastically. Remorse indeed! It
.p613
was a striking example of your true conspirator's blindness
of the stupid subtlety of people with one idea. This was a
drama of love not of conscience," Razumov continued to himself,
mockingly. A woman the old fellow was making up to ! A robust
pedlar, clearly a rival, throwing him down a flight of stairs . . . 
And at sixty, for a life-long lover, it was not an easy matter
to get over. That was a feminist of a different stamp from
Peter Ivanovitch. Even the comfort of the bottle might
conceivably fail him in this supreme crisis. At such an age nothing
but a halter could cure the pangs of an unquenchable passion.
And besides there was the wild exasperation aroused by the
unjust aspersions and the contumely of the house, with the
maddening impossibility to account for that mysterious thrashing
.p614
added to these simple and bitter sorrows. {op"}Devil. Eh?"
Razumov exclaimed with mental excitement as if he had made an
interesting discovery. {op"}Ziemianitch ended by falling into
mysticism. So many of our true Russian souls end in that way!
Very characteristic." He felt pity for Ziemianitch , a large
neutral pity, such as one may feel for an unconscious multitude,
a great people seen from above like a community of crawling
ants working out its destiny. It was as if this Ziemianitch
could not possibly have done anything else. And Sophia
Antonovna's cock-sure and contemptuous {op"}some police hound"
was characteristically Russian in another way. But there was
no tragedy there. This was no drama of revolt and repression
but a comedy of errors. It was as if the devil himself were
.p615
playing a game with all of them in turn. First with him, then
with Ziemianitch, then with those revolutionists. For
obviously Sophia Antonovna could not hav said anything else. The
devil's own game this . . . .  He interrupted his earnest mental
soliloquy with a jocular thought at his own expense. {op"}Here I
am falling into mysticism too." 
    His mind was more at ease than ever. Turning about he
put his back against the rail comfortably. {op"}All this fits
with marvellous aptness" he continued to think. {op"}The
brilliance of my reputed exploit is no longer darkened by the fate
of my supposed colleague. The mystic Ziemianitch accounts for
that. An incredible chance has served me. No more need of
lies. I shall have only to listen and to keep
.p616
my scorn from getting the upper hand of my caution." 
   He sighed, folded his arms, his chin dropped on his breast
{ -- }and it was a long time before he started forward, from that
pose with the idea that he had made up his mind to do something
that day. What it was he could not immediately recall; yet
he made no effort of memory; for he was uneasily certain that
he would remember presently. 
   He had not gone more than a hundred yards towards the town
when he slowed down, almost faltered in his walk, at the sight 
of a figure
walking in the contrary direction, draped in a cloak under a
soft, broad-brimmed hat, picturesque but diminutive, as if seen
through the big end of an opera glass.
It was impossible to avoid
.p617
that man for there was no issue for retreat. 
   {op"}Another one going to that mysterious meeting" thought
Razumov. He was right in his surmise{ -- }only {it}this{ro} one, 
unlike
the others who came from a distance, was known to him personally. 
Still
he hoped to pass on with a mere bow, but it was impossible to
ignore the little thin hand with hairy wrist and knuckles
protruded in a friendly wave from under the folds of the cloak
worn Spanish-wise, in
disregard of a fairly warm day, a corner flung over the shoulder. 
   {op"}And how is Herr Razumov" sounded the greeting in German,
by that alone made more odious to the object of the
affable recognition. At closer quarters the diminutive personage
looked like a reduction of an ordinary-sized man, with a lofty
.p618
brow bared for a moment by the raising of the hat, the great
pepper and salt full beard spread over the proportionally broad
chest. A fine bold nose jutted over a thin mouth hidden in
the mass of fine hair. All this, accented features, strong
limbs in their relative smallness, appeared delicate without the
slightest sign of debility. The eyes alone, almond-shaped and
brown, were too big and as if misty, with the whites slightly
bloodshot by too much pen labour under a lamp. The
obscure celebrity of the tiny man was well known to Razumov.
Polyglot, of unknown parentage, of indefinite nationality,
anarchist with a pedantic and ferocious temperament and an
amazingly inflammatory turn for invective, he was a power in the
background, this violent pamphleteer, clamouring for revolutionary
.p619
justice, this Julius Laspara editor of the {it}Living Word{ro},
confident of conspirators, inditer of sanguinary menaces and
manifestos, suspected of being in the secret of every plot. Laspara
lived in the old town in a sombre narrow
house left him by some naive middle-class admirer of his
humanitarian eloquence. His two daughters overtopped
him head and shoulders; and a pasty-faced lean boy of six,
languishing in the dark rooms in blue cotton overalls and clumsy
boots might have belonged to either
one of them or to neither. No stranger
could tell. Julius Laspara no doubt knew which of his girls
it was who after casually vanishing for a few years had
as casually returned to him possessed of that child; but with
.p620
admirable pedantry he had refrained from asking her for
details, no, not so much as the name of the father because
maternity should be an anarchist function. Razumov had been
admitted twice to that suite of several small dark rooms on the top
floor, dusty window-panes, litter of all sort of sweepings all
over the place, half full glasses of tea forgotten on every
table, the two Laspara daughters prowling about enigmatically
silent, misty eyed like the father, corsetless and generally
in their want of shape and the disorder of their rumpled attire
resembling old dolls, the great but obscure Julius, his feet
twisted round his three-legged stool, always ready to receive the
visitors, the pen instantly dropped, the body screwed round with
a striking display of the lofty brow and of the great austere
.p621
beard. When he got down from his stool it was as though he
had descended from the heights of olympus. He became dwarfed
by his daughters, by the furniture, by any caller of ordinary
stature. But he very seldom left it and still more rarely was
seen walking abroad in broad daylight. 
   It must have been some matter of serious importance which had
driven him out in that direction at that
afternoon. Evidently he wished to be amiable to that young man
whose arrival had made some sensation in the world of
political refugees. In Russian now, which he spoke, as he spoke and
wrote in four or five other European languages, without
distinction and without force (other than that of sustained
invective), he inquired if Razumov had taken his inscriptions
.p622
at the University as yet. And the young man shaking his head
negatively:{ -- }
   {op"}There's plenty of time for that. But meantime are you
not going to write something for us?" 
   He could not understand how anyone could refrain from
writing, on anything, social, economic, historical{ -- }
anything. Any subject could be treated in the right spirit,
and for the ends of social revolution. And as it happened
a friend of his in London had got in touch with a Review of
advanced ideas. . . . . {op"}We must educate, educate everybody{ -- }develop the great thought of absolute liberty and of
revolutionary justice." 
   Razumov muttered rather surlily that he did not even know
.p623
English. 
   {op"}Write in Russian. We'll have it translated. There can
be no difficulty. Why without seeking further there is Miss
Haldin. My daughters go to see her sometimes. You know the
sister. . . ." He nodded significantly. {op"}She does nothing{ -- }
has never done anything in her life. She would be quite
competent with a little assistance. Only write. You know you
must. And so goodbye for the present." 
   He raised his arm and went on. Razumov backed against the
low wall looked after him, spat violently and went on his way
with an angry mutter. 
   {op"}Cursed Jew". 
   He did not know anything about it. Julius Laspara might
.p624
have been a Translyvanian, a Turk an Andalusian or a citizen
of one of the Hanse towns for anything he could tell to the
contrary. But this is not a story of the West and this
exclamation must be recorded accompanied by the comment that it was
merely an expression of hate and contempt, best adapted to the
nature of the feelings Razumov suffered from at the time.
He was boiling with rage as though he had been grossly
insulted. He walked as if blind following instinctively the
shore of the diminutive harbour, along the quay, through a
prettily dull garden where dull people sat on chairs under the
trees, till his fury abandoning him he discovered himself in
the middle of a long broad bridge. He slowed down at once; to
his right beyond the toy like jetties he saw the green slopes
.p625
framing the Petit Lac in all the marvellous banality of the
picturesque made of painted cardboard with the more distant
stretch of water inanimate and shining like a piece of tin.
   He turned his head away from that view for the
tourists, and walked on slowly his eyes fixed on the ground.
One or two persons had to get out of his way, and then turned
round to give a surprised stare to his profound absorption.
The insistance of the celebrated subsersive journalist rankled
in his mind strangely. Write. Must write! He! write! A
sudden light flashed upon him. To write was the very thing
he had made up his mind to do that day. He had made up his
mind irrevocably to that step and then had forgotten all about
it. That incorrigible tendency to escape from the grip of the
.p626
situation was fraught with serious danger. He was ready to
despise himself for it. What was it? Levity, or deep seated
weakness? Or an unconscious dread? . . . 
   {op"}Is it that I am shrinking . . .  It can't be! It's
impossible. To shrink now would be worse than moral suicide{ -- }
it would be nothing less than moral damnation" he thought.
{op"}Is it possible that I have a conventional conscience?" 
   He rejected that hypothesis with scorn and checked on
the edge of the pavement made ready to cross the road and
proceed up the wide street facing the head of the bridge; and that
for no other reason except that it was there, before him.
But at the moment a couple of carriages and a slow moving cart
interposed, and suddenly he turned sharp to the left, following
.p627
the quay again but now away from the lake. 
   {op"}It may be just my health" he thought, allowing himself
a very unusual doubt of his soundness; for with the exception
of a childish ailment or two he had never been ill in his life.
But that was a danger too. Only it seemed as though he were
being looked after in a specially remarkable way. {op"}If I
believed in an active providence" Razumov said to himself, amused
grimly, {op"}I would see here the working of an ironical finger.
To have a Julius Laspara put in my way as if expressly to
remind me of my purpose is . . . .  Write, he had said. I must
write. I must, indeed! I shall write{ -- }never fear. Certainly.
That's why I am here for. And for the future I shall have
something to write about." 
   He was exciting himself by this mental soliloquy. But
.p628
the idea of writing evoked the thought of a place to write in,
of shelter, of privacy and naturally of his lodgings, mingled
with a distaste for the necessary exertion of getting there,
with a mistrust as of some hostile influence awaiting him
within these odious four walls. 
   {op"}Suppose one of them" he asked himself were to take a
fancy to call on me while I am writing." The mere prospect of
such an interruption made him shudder. One could lock one's
door{ -- }or ask the tobacconist downstairs (some sort of a
refugee himself) to tell inquirers that one was not in. Not very
good precautions, those. The manner of his life, he felt,
must be kept clear of every cause for suspicion or even
occasion for wonder, down to such trifling occurrences as a
delay in opening a locked door. {op"}I wish I were in the middle
.p629
of some field miles away from everywhere" he thought. 
   He had unconsciously turned to the left once more and now
was aware of being on a bridge again. This one was much
narrower than the other and instead of being straight made a
sort of elbow or angle. At the point of that angle a short
arm joined it to a hexagonal islet with a soil
of gravel and its shores faced with dressed stone, a perfection
of puerile neatness. A couple of tall poplars and a few other
trees stood grouped on the clean dark gravel, and under them
a few garden benches, and a bronze effigy of Jean
Jacques Rousseau seated on its pedestal. 
   On setting his foot on it Razumov became aware that
except for the woman in charge of the refreshment cha{icr}let there
was no one on the island. There was something of naive, odious
.p630
and inane simplicity about that unfrequent tiny crumb of
earth named after Jean Jacques Rousseau. Something pretentious
and shabby too. He asked for a glass of milk which he drank
standing at one draught (nothing had passed his lips since the
morning) and was going away with a heavy lagging step when a
thought stopped him short. He had found precisely what he
needed. If solitude could ever be secured in the open air in
the middle of a town he would have it there on this absurd
island, together with the faculty of watching the only
approach. 
   He went back heavily to a garden seat, dropped into it.
This was the place for making a beginning of that writing
which had to be done. The materials he had on him. {op"}I shall
.p631
always come here" he said to himself and afterwards sat for
quite a long time motionless, without thought and sight and
hearing, almost without life. He sat long enough for the
declining sun to dip behind the roofs of the town at his back,
and throw the shadow of the houses on the lake front over the
islet. He pulled out of his pocket a fountain pen
opened a small note book on his knee, and began to write quickly
raising his eyes every moment at the connecting arm of the
bridge. These glances were needless; the people crossing over
in the distance seemed unwilling even to look at the islet
where the exiled effigy of the author of the Social Contract
towered above the bowed head of Razumov in the sombre
immobility of bronze. After finishing his scribbling Razumov with a
.p632
sort of feverish haste put away the pen, then rammed the 
note-book into his pocket, first tearing out the written pages with
an almost convulsive brusqueness. But the folding of the
flimsy batch in half on his knee was executed with thoughtful
nicety. That done he leaned back in his seat and remained
motionless with the papers crushed in his left hand. The
twilight had come before he got up and began to pace to and fro
slowly under the trees. 
   {op"}There can be no doubt that now I am safe" he thought.
His fine ear could detect the faintly accentuated murmurs of
the current breaking against the point of the island and he
forgot himself in listening to them with interest. But even
to his acute sense of hearing the sound was too elusive. 
.p633
   {op"}Extraordinary occupation I am giving myself up to" he
murmured. And it occurred to him that that was about the only
sound he could listen to innocently and for his own pleasure
as it were. Yes, the sound of water, the voice of the wind{ -- }
completely foreign to human passions. All the other sounds
of this earth brought contamination to the solitude of a soul." 
   That was Mr. Razumov's feeling, the soul of course being
his own, and the word being used not in the theological sense
but standing as far as I can understand it for that part of
Mr. Razumov which was not his body and more specially
.p634
in danger from the fires of this earth. It is well known that
the way of salvation is hard, darkened by the shades of error
and made lonely to an independent traveller. Even those who
travel in guided troops and organized caravans are not spared
the terrors of isolation. And it must be admitted that in Mr.
Razumov's case the bitterness of solitude from which he
suffered was not an altogether morbid phenomenon.
.p634 {cn}I {cop}That I should mention again here that Mr. Razumov's youth had no one in the world as literally no one as it can be honestly affirmed of any human being, it is but a statement of fact from a man who believes in the psychological value of facts. There is also there perhaps a desire of punctilious fairness. Unidentified with anyone in this narrative where .p635 both the aspects of honour and shame are remote from the ideas of the western world and taking my stand on the ground of common humanity it is perhaps for that very reason that I feel a strange reluctance to state baldly here what every reader has most likely already discovered by himself. Such reluctance may appear absurd if it were not for the thought that from the imperfection of language there is always something ungracious and even disgraceful in the exhibition of naked truth. But the time has come when Councillor of State Mikulin can no longer be ignored. His simple question {op"}Where to?" on which we left Mr. Razumov in St. Petersburg throws a light on the general meaning of this inidividual case.   {op"}Where to?" was his answer in the form of a gentle.p636question to Mr. Razumov's independent declaration that he was going away. The question was not menacing in the least and indeed had the ring of innocent inquiry. Had it been taken in a merely topographical sense the only answer to it would have appeared sufficiently appalling to Mr. Razumov. Where to? Back to his rooms where the revolution had sought him out to put to a sudden test his dormant instincts, his half conscious thoughts and almost wholly unconscious ambitions, by the touch as of some furious and dogmatic religion with its call to frantic sacrifices, its tender resignations, its dreams and hopes uplifting the soul, by the side of the most sombre moods of despair. And Mr. Razumov had let go the door handle and had come back to the middle of the room asking angrily {op"}What .p637 do you mean by it?"    As far as I can tell Councillor Mikulin did not answer that question. He drew Mr. Razumov into familiar conversation. It is the peculiarity of Russian natures that however strongly engaged in the drama of action they are still turning their ear to the murmur of abstract ideas. This conversation (and others later on) need not be recorded. Suffice it to say that he brought Mr. Razumov as we know him to the test of another faith. There was nothing official in its expression and Mr. Razumov was led to defend his attitude of detachment. But Councillor Mikulin would have none of his arguments. {op"}For a man like you" were his last weighty words in the discussion {op"}Such a position is impossible. Don't forget that I have seen that interesting piece of paper. I understand your liberalism. .p638 I have an intellect of that kind myself. All this is a question of method. But the principle of revolt is a physical intoxication, a sort of hysteria which must be kept away from the masses. You agree without reserve{ -- }don't you. Because don't you see Kirylo Sidorovitch abstention, reserve, in certain situations come very near to political crime. The ancient Greeks understood that very well."   Mr. Razumov listening with a faint smile wondered whether .p639 this was not something in the nature of an unofficial warning. Suppressing his exasperation he asked Councillor Mikulin point blank if that meant he was going to have him watched.    The high official took no offence at the cynical inquiry    {op"}No Kirylo Sidorovitch" he answered gravely. {op"}I don't mean to have you watched."    Razumov suspecting that this was a lie, affected the greatest liberty of mind during the short remainder of that interview. The older man expressed .p640 himself throughout in familiar terms, and with a sort of shrewd simplicity. Razumov concluded that to get to the bottom of that mind was for him an impossible feat. A great disquiet made his heart beat quicker. The high official issuing from behind the desk was actually offering to shake hands with him.    {op"}Good bye Mr. Razumov. An understanding between .p641 intelligent men is always a satisfactory occurrence. Is it not? And of course these rebel gentlemen have not the monopoly of intelligence."    {op"}I presume that I shall not be wanted any more?" Razumov brought out that question while his hand was still being grasped. Councillor Mikulin released it slowly.    {op"}That, Mr. Razumov," he said with great earnestness {op"}isas it may be. God alone knows the future. But you may rest assured that I never thought of having you watched. You are a young man of great mental independence. Yes. You are going away free as air, but you shall end by coming back to us."    {op"}I! . . I!" Razumov exclaimed in an appalled murmur of .p642 protest. {op"}What for" he added feebly.   { -- }{op"}Yes! You, yourself, Kirylo Sidorovitch" the high police functionary insisted in a low, severe tone of conviction. {op"}You shall be coming back to us. Some of our greatest minds had to do that in the end."    {op"}Our greatest minds" repeated Razumov, in a dazed voice.    {op"}Yes indeed! Our greatest minds . . .  Goodbye."    Razumov shown out of the room walked away from the door. But before he got to the end of the passage he heard heavy footsteps and a voice behind his back calling upon him to stop. He turned his head and was startled to see Councillor Mikulin in person. The high functionary hurried up, very simple, slightly out of breath. .p643    {op"}One minute. As to what we were talking about just now it shall be as God wills it. But I may have occasion for require you again. You look surprised Kirylo Sidorovitch. Yes.  . . .  to clear up any further point that may turn up."    {op"}But I don't know anything" stammered out Razumov. {op"}I couldn't possibly know anything."    {op"}Who can tell? Things are ordered in a wonderful manner. Who can tell what {it}may{ro} become disclosed to you before this day is out? You have been already the instrument of Providence. You smile Kirylo Sidorovitch; you are an esprit fort. (Razumov was not conscious of having smiled). But I believe firmly in Providence. Such a confession on the lips of a man like me may sound to you funny. But you yourself yet some day . . . . Or .p644 else what happened to you can not be accounted for at all. Yes, decidedly I shall have occasion to see you again{ -- }but not here. This wouldn't be quite{ -- }h'm . . . .  Some convenient place shall be made known to you. And even for the written communications between us in that respect or otherwise had better pass through the intermediary, of our,{ -- }if I may express myself so{ -- }mutual friend, Prince K{---}. Now I beg you Kirylo Sidorovitch{ -- }don't! I am certain he'll consent You must give me the credit of being aware of what I am saying. You have no better friend than Prince K{---}and as to myself it is a long time now since I've been honoured by. . . ."    He glanced down his beard.    {op"}I won't detain you any longer. We shall certainly meet .p645 once more. It may be some little time tho' before we do. Till then may Heaven send you fruitful reflexions. We live in difficult times, in times of monstrous chimeras and evil dreams and criminal follies.    Once in the street Razumov started off rapidly, without caring for the direction. At first he thought of nothing; but in a little while the consciousness of his position presented itself to him as something so ugly, dangerous and absurd; the difficulty of ever freeing himself from the toils of that complication so insoluble, that the idea of going back and, as he termed it to himself, {it}confessing{ro} to Councillor Mikulin flashed through his mind.    Go back! What for? Confess! To what? {op"}I have been .p646 speaking to him with the greatest openness" he said to himself with perfect truth. {op"}What else could I tell him? That I have undertaken to carry a message to that brute Ziemianitch? Establish a false complicity and destroy what chance of safety I have for nothing{ -- }what folly!".    Yet he could not defend himself from fancying that Councillor Mikulin was perhaps the only man in the world able to understand his conduct. To be understood appeared extremely .p647 fascinating. On the way home he had to stop several times; all his strength seemed to run out of his limbs; and in the movement of the busy streets, isolated as if in a desert, he remained .p648 suddenly motionless for a minute or so, before he could proceed on his way. He reached his rooms at last.    Then came an illness, something in the nature of a low fever, which all at once removed him to a great distance from the perplexing actualities, from his very room even. He never lost consciousness; he only seemed to himself to be existing languidly somewhere very far away from everything that had ever happened to him. He came out of this state slowly, with an effect, that is to say, of extreme slowness, though the actual number of days was not very great. And when he had got back into the middle of things they were all changed, subtly and provokingly in their nature: inanimate objects, human faces, the landlady, the rustic servant girl, the staircase, the .p649 streets, the very air. He tackled these changed conditions in a spirit of severity. He walked to and fro to the university, ascended stairs, paced the passages, listened to lectures, took notes, crossed courtyards in a sort of angry aloofness, his teeth set hard till his jaws ached.    He was perfectly aware of mad-cap Kostia gazing like a young retriever from a distance, of the famished student with the red drooping nose keeping scrupulously away as desired, of twenty others, perhaps, he knew well enough to speak to. And they all had an air of curiosity and concern as if they expected something to happen. {op"}This can't last much longer" thought Razumov more than once. On certain days he was afraid that any one addressing him suddenly in a certain way, would make him .p650 scream out insanely a lot of filthy abuse. Often, after returning home, he would drop into a chair in his cap and cloak and remain still for hours holding some book he had got from the library, in his hand; or he would pick up the little penknife and sit there scraping his nails endlessly and feeling furious all the time{ -- }simply furious. {op"}This is impossible" he would mutter suddenly to the empty room.    Fact to be noted: this room might conceivably have become physically repugnant to him, emotionally intolerable, morally uninhabitable. But no. Nothing of the sort (and he had himself dreaded it at first) nothing of the sort happened. On the contrary, he liked his lodgings better than any other .p651 shelter he, who had never known a home, had ever hired before. Heliked his lodgings so well that often, on that very account, he found a certain difficulty in making up his mind to go out. It resembled a physical seduction such as, for instance, makes a man reluctant, to leave the neighbourhood of a fire on a cold day.    For as at that time he seldom stirred except to go to the University (what else was there to do?) it followed that whenever he went abroad he felt himself at once closely involved in the moral consequences of his act. It was there that the dark prestige of the Haldin mystery fell on him, clung to him like a poisoned robe which it was impossible to fling off. He suffered from it exceedingly, as well as from the .p652 conversational, commonplace, unavoidable intercourse with the other kind of students. {op"}They must be wondering at the changein me," he reflected anxiously. He had an uneasy notion of having savagely told one or two innocent, nice enough fellows, to go to the devil. Once a married professor, he used to call upon formerly, addressed him in passing: {op"}How is it we never see you at our Wednesdays now Kirylo Sidorovitch?" Razumov was conscious of meeting this advance with odious muttering boorishness. The professor was obviously too astonished to be offended. All this was bad. And all this was Haldin, always Haldin{ -- }nothing but Haldin{ -- }everywhere Haldin: a moral spectre infinitely more effective than any visible apparition of the dead. It was only the room through which he had blundered on his way .p653 from crime to death that he did not seem to be able to haunt. Not, to be exact, that he was ever completely absent from it but that he had no sort of power. There it was Mr. Razumov who had the upper hand, in a composed sense of his own superiority. A vanquished phantom{ -- }nothing more. Often in the evening, his repaired watch faintly ticking on the table by the side of the lighted lamp, Razumov would look up from his writing and stare at the bed with expectant, dispassionate attention. Nothing was ever to be seen there. He never really supposed that anything ever should be seen there. After a while he would shrug his shoulders slightly and bend again over his work. For he had gone to work and, at first, with some success. His unwillingness to leave that place where .p654 he was safe from Haldin grew so strong that at last he ceased to go out at all. From early morning till far into the night he wrote, he wrote for nearly a week; never looking at the time and only throwing himself on the bed when he could keep his eyes open no longer. Then, one afternoon, quite casually, he happened to glance at his watch. He laid down his pen slowly.    {op"}At this the very hour" was his thought {op"}the fellow stoleunseen into this room while I was out. And there he sat quiet as a mouse{ -- }perhaps in this very chair."    Razumov got up and began to pace the floor steadily glancing at the watch now and then.{op"}This is the time when I returned and found him standing there against the stove" he observed to himself. When it grew dark he lit his lamp. .p655 Later on he interrupted his tramping once more only to wave away angrily the girl who attempted to enter the room with tea and something to eat on a tray. And presently he noted the watch pointing at the hour of his own going forth into the falling snow on that terrible errand.    {op"}Complicity" he muttered faintly and resumed his pacing keeping his eye on the hands as they crept on slowly to the time of his return.    {op"}And after all" he thought suddenly, {op"}I might have been the chosen instrument of Providence. It is a manner of speaking; but there may be truth in every manner of speaking. Whatif that absurd saying were true in its essence?"    He meditated for a while then sat down his legs stretched out, .p656 with stony eyes and with his arms hanging down on each side of the chair like a man totally abandoned by Providence, desolate.    He noted the time of Haldin's departure and continued to sit still for another half hour; then muttering {op"}And now{ -- }to work" drew up to the table, seized the pen and instantly dropped it under the influence of a profoundly disquieting reflexion. {op"}There's three weeks gone by and no word from Mikulin."    What did it mean? Was he forgotten? Possibly. Then why not remain forgotten{ -- }creep in somewhere. Hide. But where? How? With whom? In what hole? And was it to be for ever or what? .p657    But a retreat was big with shadowy dangers. The eye of the social revolution was on him{ -- }and Razumov for a moment felt an unnamed and despairing dread mingled with an odious sense of humiliation. Was it possible that he no longer belonged to himself?  This was damnable. But why not simply keep on as before. Study. Advance. Work hard as if nothing had happened (and first of all win that silver medal.).p658 { -- }acquire distinction, become a great reforming servant of the greatest of States. Servant to o of the mightiest homogenous mass of mankind with a capability of logical, guided development in a brotherly solidarity of force and aim such as the world had never dreamt of . . . .  The Russian nation . . . ."    Calm, resolved, steady in his great purpose he was stretching his hand towards the pen when he happened to glance towards the bed. He rushed at it, enraged, with a mental scream: {op"}It's you crazy fanatic who stands in the way!" He flung the pillow on the floor violently, tore the blankets aside. . . Nothing there. And turning away he caught for an instant like a vivid detail in a dissolving view .p659 of two heads, the eyes of General T{---} and of privy Councillor Mikulin side by side fixed upon him, quite different in character, but with the same unflinching and weary and yet purposeful expression . . . Servants of the nation!"    Razumov tottered to the washstand very alarmed about himself, drank some water and bathed his forehead. {op"}This will pass and leave no trace" he thought confidently. {op"}I am all right". But as to supposing that he had been forgotten it was perfect nonsense. He was a marked man on that side. And that was nothing. It was what that miserable phantom stood for that had to be got out of the way  . . .  {op"}If one only could go and spit it all out at some of them{ -- }and take the consequences."    He imagined himself accosting the red-nosed student and .p660 suddenly shaking his fist in his face. {op"}From that one tho'" he reflected, {op"}there's nothing to be got, because he has no mind of his own. He's living in a red democratic trance. Ah! you want to smash your way into universal happiness my boy. I will give you universal happiness you silly hypnotised ghoul, you! And what about my own happiness, eh? Haven't I got any right to it just because I can think for myself . . . ."    And again, but with a different mental accent Razumov said to himself: {op"}I am young. Everything can be lived down." At that moment he was crossing the room slowly intending to sit down on the sofa and try to compose his thoughts. But before he got so far everything abandoned him{ -- }hope, courage, belief in himself, trust in men. His heart had as it were suddenly emptied itself. It was no use .p661 struggling on. Rest, work, solitude, and the frankness of intercourse with his kind were alike forbidden to him. Everything was gone. His existence was a great cold blank, something like the enormous plain of the whole Russia levelled with snow and fading gradually on all sides into shadows and mist.    He sat down, swimmy in the head, closed his eyes, and remained like that, bolt upright on the sofa and perfectly awake for the rest of the night{ -- }till the girl bustling into the outer room with the samovar thumped with her fist on the door calling out {op"}Kirylo Sidorovitch please! It is time for you to get up!"    Then pale like a corpse obeying the dread summons of .p662 judgment Razumov opened his eyes and got up.    Nobody will be surprised to hear, I suppose, that when the summons came he went to see Councillor Mikulin. It came that very morning, while looking white and shaky like an invalid just out of bed he was trying to shave himself. The envelope was addressed in the little attorney's handwriting. That envelope contained another superscribed to Razumov in Prince K{---}'s hand with the request {op"}Please forward under cover at once" in a corner. But the note inside was an autograph of Councillor Mikulin. The writer stated candidly that nothing had arisen which needed clearing up, but nevertheless appointed a meeting with Mr Razumov at a certain address in town which seemed to be that of an oculist. .p663    Razumov read it, finished shaving, dressed, looked at the note again and muttered gloomily {op"}Oculist". He pondered over it for a time, lit a match and burned the two envelopes and the enclosure carefully. Afterwards he waited sitting perfectly idle and not even looking at anything in particular till the appointed hour drew near and then went out.    Whether, looking at the unofficial character of the summons, he might have refrained from attending to it is hard to say. Probably not. At any rate he went; but what's more he went with a certain eagerness, which may appear incredible till it is explained that Councillor Mikulin was the only person on earth with whom Razumov could talk taking the Haldin adventure for granted. And Haldin once taken for granted was no longer .p664 a haunting, falsehood-breeding spectre. Whatever troubling power he exercised in all the other places of the earth Razumov knew very well that at this oculist's address he would be only the hanged murderer of Mr. de P{---} and nothing more. For the dead can live only with the exact intensity and quality of the life imparted to them by the living. So Mr. Razumov certain of relief went to meet Councillor Mikulin with the eagerness of a pursued person welcoming any sort of shelter.    This much said, there is no need to tell anything more of that first interview and of the several others. To the morality of a western reader an account of these meetings would wear perhaps the sinister character of old, legendary tales where the Enemy of Mankind is represented holding subtly .p665 mendacious dialogues with some tempted soul. It is not my part to protest. Let me but remark that the Evil One with his single passion of Satanic Pride for the only motive is yet, on a larger, modern view allowed to be not quite so black as he used to be painted. With what greater latitude then should we appraise the exact shade of mere mortal man, with his many passions and his miserable ingenuity in error, always dazzled by the base glitter of mixed motives, everlastingly betrayed by a short-sighted wisdom.    Councillor Mikulin was one of these powerful officials who in a position not obscure, not occult, but simply inconspicuous exercise a great influence over the methods rather .p666 than over the conduct of affairs. A devotion to  Church and Throne is not in itself a criminal sentiment; to prefer the will of one to the will of many does not argue the possession of a black heart or prove congenital idiocy. Councillor Mikulin was not only a clever but also subtle official. Privately he was a bachelor with a love of comfort, living alone in an appartement of five rooms luxuriously furnished; and was known by his intimates to be an enlightened patron of the art of female dancing. Later on the larger world first heard of him in the very hour of his downfall, during one of these state trials which astonish and .p667 puzzle the average plain man who reads the newspapers by a glimpse of unsuspected intrigues. And in the stir of vaguely seen monstrosities, in that momentary, mysterious disturbance of muddy waters Councillor Mikulin went under, dignified, with only a calm emphatic protest of his innocence{ -- }nothing more. No disclosures damaging to a harassed autocracy, complete fidelity to the secret of the miserable Arcana Imperic, deposited in his patriotic breast, a display of bureaucratic stoicism in a Russian official's ineradicable, almost sublime contempt for truth; stoicism of silence understood only by the very few of the initiated and not without a certain cynical grandeur of self-sacrifice on the part of a sybarite. For the .p668 terribly heavy sentence turned Councillor Mikulin civilly into a corpse and actually into something very much like a common convict.    It seems that the savage autocracy any more than the divine democracy does not limit its diet exclusively to the bodies of its enemies. The downfall of His Excellency Gregory Gregorievitch Mikulin (which did not occur till some years later) completes all that is known of the man. But at the time of Mr. de P{---} murder (or execution) Councillor Mikulin underthe modest style of Head of Department at the General .p669 Secretariat exercised a wide influence as the confident and right hand man of his former school fellow and life-long friend General T{---}. One can imagine them talking over the case of Mr. Razumov in the full sense of their unbounded power over all the lives in Russia, with cursory disdain, like two Olympians glancing at a worm. The relationship with Prince K{---} was enough to save Razumov from some carelessly arbitrary proceeding; and it is also very probable that after the interview at the Secretariat he would have been left alone. Councillor Mikulin would have not forgotten him (he forgot no onewho ever fell under his observation) but would have simply dropped him for ever. Councillor Mikulin was a good-natured .p670 man and wished no harm to any one; besides (with his own reforming tendencies) being favourably impressed by that young student the son of Prince K{---} and apparently no fool.    But as fate would have it, while Mr. Razumov was finding that no way of life was possible to him, Councillor Mikulin's discreet abilities were rewarded by a very responsible post{ -- }nothing less than the direction of the general police supervision over Europe. And it was then, and then only when taking in hand the perfecting of the service which watches the revolutionist activities abroad that he thought again of Mr. Razumov. He saw great possibilities of special usefulness in that uncommon young man on whom he had a hold already, with his peculiar temperament, his unsettled mind and shaken conscience and .p671 struggling in the toils of a false position. . . .  It was as if the revolutionists themselves had put in his hand that tool so much finer than the common base instruments, so perfectly fitted, if only invested with sufficient credit, to penetrate into places inaccessible to common informers. Providential. Providential. And Prince K{---} taken into the secret was ready enough to adopt that mystical view too. {op"}It will be necessary tho' to make a career for him afterwards" he had stipulated anxiously. {op"}Oh! Absolutely. We shall make that our affair" Mikulin had agreed. Prince K{---}'s mysticism was of an artless kind; but Councillor Mikulin was astute enough for two.    Things and men have always a certain sense, a certain side by which they must be got hold of if one wants to obtain a .p672 solid grasp and a perfect command. The power of Councillor Mikulin consisted in the ability to seize upon that sense, that side, in the men he used. It did not matter to him what it was{ -- }vanity, despair, love, hate, greed, intelligent pride or stupid conceit it was all one to him as long as the man could be made to serve. The obscure unrelated young student Razumov in the moment of great moral loneliness was allowed to feel that he was an object of interest to a small group of people of high position. Prince K{---} was persuaded to intervene personally; and on a certain occasion gave way to a manly emotion which, all unexpected as it was, quite upset Mr. Razumov. The sudden embrace of that man agitated by his loyalty to a throne and by suppressed paternal affection was a revelation to Mr. Razumov of something .p673 within his own breast.    {op"}So that was it!" he exclaimed to himself. A sort of contemptuous tenderness softened the young man's grim view of hisposition as he reflected upon that agitated interview with Prince K{---}. This simple-minded worldly ex-guardsman and senator whose soft grey official whiskers had brushed against his cheek, his aristocratic and convinced father, was he a whit less estimable or more absurd than that famine-stricken, fanatical revolutionist, the red-nosed student?    And there was some pressure too{ -- }beside the persuasiveness. Mr. Razumov was always being made to feel that he had committed himself. There was no getting away from that feeling, from that soft unanswerable {op"}Where to?" of Councillor Mikulin. .p674 But no susceptibilities were ever hurt. It was to be a dangerous  mission to Geneva for obtaining, at a critical moment .p675 absolutely reliable information from a very inaccessible quarter of the inner revolutionary circle. There were indications that a very serious plot was being matured. . . .  The repose indispensable to a great country was at stake. . . .  A great scheme of orderly reforms would be endangered.  . . .  The highest personages in the land were patriotically uneasy, and so on. In short Councillor Mikulin knew what to say. This skill is to be inferred clearly from the mental and psychological self confession, self analysis of Mr. Razumov written journal{ -- }the pitiful resource of a young man who had near him no trusted intimacy, no natural affection to turn to.    How all this preliminary work was concealed from observation need not be recorded. The expedient of the oculist gives a .p676 sufficient instance. Councillor Mikulin was resourceful, and the task not very difficult. Any fellow student, even the red-nosed one, was perfectly welcome to see Mr. Razumov entering a private house to consult an oculist. Ultimate success depended solely on the revolutionary self-delusion which credited Razumov with a mysterious complicity in the Haldin affair. To be compromised in it was credit enough{ -- }and it was their own doing. .p677 It was precisely {it}that{ro} which stamped Mr. Razumov as providential man, wide as poles apart from the usual type of agent for {op"}Europeansupervision."    And it was {it}that{ro} which the Secretariat set itself the task to foster by a course of calculated and false indiscretions.    It came at last to this that one evening Mr. Razumov was unexpectedly called upon by one of the {op"}thinking" students whom formerly, before the Haldin affair, he used to meet at various private gatherings: a big fellow with a quiet unassuming manner and a pleasant voice.    Recognising his voice raised in the anteroom {op"}May one .p678 come in" Razumov lounging idly on his couch jumped up. {op"}Suppose he were coming to stab me?" he thought sardonically, and assuming a green shade over his left eye said in a severe tone {op"}Come in."    The other was embarrassed; hoped he was not intruding.    {op"}You haven't been seen for several days and I've wondered . . " He coughed a little. {op"}Eye better?"    {op"}Nearly well now."    {op"}Good. I won't stop a minute; but you see, I, that is we . . . . anyway I have undertaken the duty to warn you Kirylo Sidorovitch that you are living in false security maybe."    Razumov sat still with his head leaning on his hand which nearly concealed the unshaded eye. .p679    {op"}I have that idea too."    {op"}That's all right then. Everything seems quiet now but those people are preparing some move of general repression. That's of course. But it isn't that I came to tell you." He hitched his chair closer, dropped his voice. {op"}You shall be arrested before long{ -- }we fear"    An obscure scribe in the Secretariat had overheard a few words of a certain conversation and had caught a glimpse of a certain report. This intelligence was not to be neglected.    Razumov laughed a little and his visitor became very anxious.    {op"}Ah! Kirylo Sidorovitch, this is no laughing matter. They have left you alone for a while, but . . . . ! Indeed you had better try to leave the country Kirylo Sidorovitch while there's yet time." .p680    Razumov jumped up and began to thank him for the advice with mocking effusiveness, so that the other colouring up took himself off with the notion that this mysterious Razumov was not a person to be warned or advised by inferior mortals.    Councillor Mikulin informed the next day of the incident expressed his satisfaction. {op"}H'm. Ha! Exactly what was wanted to . . . ." and glanced down his beard.    {op"}I conclude" said Razumov, {op"}that the moment has come for me to start on my mission."    {op"}The psychological moment" Councillor Mikulin insisted softly{ -- }very grave{ -- }as if awed.    All the arrangements to give verisimilitude to the appearance of a difficult escape were made. Councillor Mikulin did not expect .p681 to see Mr Razumov again before his departure. These meetings were a risk, and there was nothing more to settle.    {op"}We have said everything to each other by now, Kirylo Sidorovitch" said the high official feelingly, pressing Razumov's hand with that unreserved heartiness a Russian can convey in his manner. {op"}There is nothing obscure between us. And I will tell you what! I consider myself fortunate in having{ -- }h'm{ -- }your . . . ."    He glanced down his beard; and after a moment of grave silence he handed to Razumov a half sheet of note paper{ -- }an abbreviated note of matters already discussed, certain points of inquiry, the line of conduct agreed on, a few hints as to personalities and so on. It was the only compromising document .p682 in the case but as Councillor Mikulin observed it could be easily destroyed. Mr. Razumov had better not see anyone now{ -- }till on the other side of the frontier when of course it will be just that . . . . see and hear and . . .    He glanced down his beard; but when Razumov declared his intention to see one person at least Councillor Mikulin failed to conceal a sudden uneasiness. The young man's studious solitary and austere existence was well known to him. It was the greatest guarantee of fitness. He became deprecatory. Had his dear Kirylo Sidorovitch considered whether in view of such a momentous enterprise it wasn't really advisable to sacrifice every sentiment. . . .    Razumov interrupted the remonstrance scornfully. It was not a young woman; it was a young fool he wished to see for a certain purpose. Councillor .p683 Mikulin was relieved but surprised.    {op"}Ah! And what for{ -- }precisely?"    {op"}For the sake of improving the aspect of verisimilitude," said Razumov curtly, in a desire to affirm his independence. {op"}I must be trusted in what I do."    Councillor Mikulin gave way tactfully, murmuring{ -- }   {op"}Oh certainly, certainly. Your judgment. . . . . "    And with another handshake they parted.    The fool of whom Mr. Razumov had thought was the rich and festive student known as madcap Kostia. Feather-headed, loquacious, excitable, one could make certain of his utter and complete indiscretion. But that riotous youth when reminded by Razumov of his offers of service some time ago passed from his usual elation into boundless dismay. .p684    {op"}Oh Kirylo Sidorovitch my dearest friend{ -- }my saviour{ -- }What shall I do? I've blown last night every rouble I had from my dad the other day. Can't you give me till Thursday? I shall rush round to all the usurers I know . . . No! Of course you can't! Don't look at me like that. What shall I do? No use asking the old man. I tell you he's given me a fistful of big notes three days ago. Miserable wretch that I am."    He wrung his hands in despair. Impossible to confide in the old man. {op"}They" had given him a decoration, a cross on the neck only last year and he had been cursing the modern tendencies ever since. Just then he would see all the intellectuals in Russia hanged in a row rather than part with a single rouble.    {op"}Kirylo  Sidorovitch, wait a moment. Don't despise me. I .p685 have it. I'll yes!{ -- }I'll do it{ -- }I'll break into his desk. There's no help for it. I know the drawer where he keeps his plunder and I can buy a chisel on my way home. He will be terribly upset but, you know, the dear old duffer really loves me. He'll have to get over it{ -- }and I too. Kirylo my dear soul if you can only wait for a few hours{ -- }till this evening{ -- }I shall steal all the blessed lot I can lay my hands on! You doubt me! Why? You've only to say the word."    {op"}Steal by all means" said Razumov, fixing him stonily.    {op"}To the devil with the ten commandments!" cried the other with the greatest animation. {op"}It's the new future now."    But when he entered Razumov's room late in the evening it was with an unaccustomed soberness of manner, almost solemnly. .p686    {op"}It's done" he said.    Razumov sitting bowed, his clasped hands hanging between his knees shuddered at the familiar sound of these words. Kostia deposited slowly in the circle of lamplight a small brown paper parcel tied with a piece of string.    {op"}As I've said{ -- }all I could lay my hands on. The old boy'll think the end of the world has come."    Razumov nodded from the couch and contemplated the hare-brained fellow's gravity with a feeling of malicious pleasure.    {op"}I've made my little sacrifice" sighed mad Kostia. {op"}And I've to thank you Kirylo Sidorovitch for the opportunity."    {op"}It has cost you something?"    {op"}Yes it has. You see the dear old duffer really loves me. He'll be hurt." .p687    {op"}And you believe all they tell you of the new future and the sacred will of the people?"    {op"}Implicitly. I would give my life  . . .   Only you see I am like a pig at the trough. I amno good. It's my nature."    Razumov lost in thought had forgotten his existence till the youth's voice raised urgently entreating him to fly without loss of time roused him unpleasantly.    {op"}All right. Well{ -- }good bye."    {op"}I am not going to leave you till I've seen you out of Petersburg" declared Kostia unexpectedly with calm determination. {op"}You can't refuse me that now. For God's sake, Kirylo my soul, they may be here any moment; and when they get you they'll immure you somewhere for ages{ -- }till your hair turns grey. I have .p688 down there the best trotter of dad's stables and a light sledge. We shall do thirty miles before the moon sets and find some roadside station . . . . . .   Razumov looked up amazed. The journey was decided{ -- }unavoidable. He had fixed the next day for his departure{ -- }on the mission. And now he discovered suddenly that he had not believed in all this at all. He had gone about listening, speaking, thinking, planning his simulated flight, with the growing conviction that all this was preposterous. As if anybody ever did such things! It was like a game of make-believe. And now he was amazed! Here was somebody who believed in it with desperate earnestness. {op"}If I don't go now, at once" thought Razumov with a start of fear, {op"}I shall never go." He rose without a word and the anxious Kostia thrust his cap on .p689 him, helped him into his cloak{ -- }or else he would have left the room bare-headed, as he stood. He was walking out silently when a sharp cry arrested him.    {op"}Kirylo!"    {op"}What?" He turned reluctantly in the doorway. Upright, with a stiffly extended arm Kostia his face set and white was pointing an eloquent forefinger at the brown little packet lying forgotten in the circle of bright light on the table. Razumov hesitated, came back for it under the severe eyes of his companion at whom he tried to smile. But the boyish mad youth was frowning. {op"}It's a dream" thought Razumov putting the little parcel into his pocket and descending the stairs. {op"}Nobody does such things." The other had him under the arm whispering of dangers ahead and of what he meant to do in .p690 certain contingencies. {op"}Preposterous" murmured Razumov to himself as he was being tucked up in the sledge. He gave himself up to watching the development of the dream with extreme attention. It continued on foreseen lines, inexorably logical: the long drive, the wait at the small station sitting by a stove. They did not exchange half a dozen words altogether. Kostia, gloomy himself, did not care to break the silence. At parting they embraced twice. It had to be done{ -- }and then Kostia vanished out of the dream.    When dawn broke Razumov, very still in a hot, stuffy rail-way car full of bedding and of sleeping people in all its dimly lighted length, rose quietly, lowered the glass a few inches and flung out onthe great plain of snow a small brown paper parcel. Then he sat down again muffled up and motionless. {op"}For the people" he thought staring out of the window. The great white desert of frozen, hard earth glided past his eyes without a sign of life.    That had been a waking act; and then the dream had him .p691 again: Prussia, Saxony, Wurtemberg, faces, sights, words{ -- }all a dream observed with an angry, compelled attention. Zurich, Geneva{ -- }still a dream, minutely followed, wearying one into harsh laughter, to fury, to death{ -- }with the fear of awaking at the end. 
.p691 
{cn}II 
{cop}{op"}Perhaps life is just that" reflected Razumov pacing to 
and fro under the trees of the little island all alone with 
the bronze statue of Rousseau. {op"}A dream and a fear." The dusk deepened. The pages written over 
and torn out his notebook were the first fruit of his {op"}mission". 
No dream that. They contained the assurance that he was on 
the eve of real discoveries. {op"}I think there is no longer 
any-thing in the way of my being completely accepted." 
   He had resumed his impressions in those pages, some of 
the conversations. He even went so far as to write{ -- }{op"}by the 
.p692 
bye I have discovered the personality of that terrible N. N. 
A horrible paunchy brute. If I hear anything of his future 
movements I shall send a warning." 
   The futility of all this overcame him like a curse. Even then 
he could not believe in the reality of his {op"}mission". He looked 
round despairingly as if for some way to redeem his existence 
from that unconquerable feeling. He crushed angrily in his hand 
the pages of the note-book. {op"}This must be posted" he 
thought. 
   He gained the bridge and returned to the north shore where 
he remembered having seen in one of the narrower streets a 
little obscure shop stocked with cheap wood carvings, its walls 
lined with extremely dirty cardboard-bound volumes of a small circulating 
.p693 
library. They sold stationery there too. A morose shabby old man 
dozed behind the counter. A thin woman in black with a sickly face,
produced the envelope he had asked for without even looking 
at him. Razumov thought that these people were safe to deal 
with because they no longer cared for anything in the world. 
He addressed the envelope on the counter with the German name 
of a certain person living in Vienna. But Razumov knew that his 
first communication for Councillor Mikulin would find its way 
to the Embassy there, be copied in cypher by somebody 
trust-worthy and sent on to its destination all safe along with the 
diplomatic correspondence. That was the arrangement contrived 
to cover up the track of the information from all unfaithful 
eyes, from all indiscretions, from all mishaps and treacheries. 
.p694 
It was to make him safe{ -- }absolutely safe. 
   He wandered out of the wretched shop and made for the 
post office. It was then that I saw him for the second time 
that day. He was crossing the Rue Montblanc with every 
appearance of a rather aimless stroller. He did not recognise 
me but I made him out at some distance. He was very good-
looking I thought this remarkable friend of Miss Haldin's 
brother. I watched him go up to the letter box and then 
retrace his steps. Again he passed me very close, but I am 
certain he did not see me that time, either. He carried his head well up 
but he had the expression of a somnambulist struggling with 
the very dream which drives him forth to wander in dangerous 
places. My thought reverted to Natalia Haldin, to her mother to 
whom he seemed to be all that was left of 
.p695 
their son and brother. 
   The westerner in me was discomposed. There was something 
shocking in the expression on that face. Had I been 
myself a conspirator, a Russian political refugee, I could have 
perhaps been able to draw some practical conclusion from this 
chance glimpse. As it was it only discomposed me strongly, 
even to the extent of awakening an indefinite apprehension in 
regard to Natalia Haldin. All this is rather inexplicable{ -- }
but such was the origin of the purpose I formed there and then 
to call on these ladies in the evening, after my solitary dinner. It 
was true that I had met Miss Haldin only a few hours before, 
.p696 
but Mrs. Haldin herself I had not seen for some considerable 
time. The truth is I had shirked calling of late. 
   Poor Mrs. Haldin! I confess she frightened me a little. 
She was one of these natures, rare enough, luckily, in which 
one can not help being interested, because they provoke at 
once, both terror and pity. One dreads their contact for onself 
and still more for those one cares for; so clear it is that they 
are born to suffer and to make others suffer too. It is strange 
to think that, I won't say liberty, but the mere liberalism of 
outlook which for us is a matter of words, of ambitions, of 
.p697 
votes (and if of feeling at all, then of the sort of feeling 
which leaves our deepest affections untouched) may be for other 
beings very much like ourselves and living under the same sky 
a heavy trial of fortitude, a matter of tears and anguish and 
blood. Mrs. Haldin had felt the pangs of her own generation. There 
was that enthusiast brother of her's; the officer they shot under 
Nicholas. A faintly ironic 
.p698 
resignation is no armour for a vulnerable heart. Mrs. Haldin struck at through 
her children was bound to suffer afresh from the past, and 
to feel the anguish of the future. 
She was of those who do not know how to heal themselves; of 
those who are too much aware of their heart; who, neither 
cowardly nor selfish, look passionately at its wounds{ -- }and count 
the cost. 
   Such thoughts as these seasoned my modest, lonely bachelor's 
meal. If anybody wishes to remark that this was a 
round-about 
way of thinking of Natalia Haldin I can only retort that 
she was well worth some concern. She had all her life before 
her. Let it be admitted then that I was thinking of Natalia 
.p699 
Haldin's life in terms of her mother's character; a manner of thinking of a girl 
permissible for an old man, not too old yet to have become a stranger 
to pity. There was almost all her youth before her; a youth 
robbed arbitrarily of its natural lightness and joy, 
overshadowed by an un-European despotism; a terribly sombre youth given 
over to the hazards of a furious strife between equally 
ferocious antagonisms. 
   I lingered over my thoughts, more than I should have done. 
One felt so helpless, and even worse{ -- }so unrelated in a way. 
At the last moment I hesitated as to going there at all. 
What was the good? 
   All this made me late; and the evening was already advanced 
when turning into the Boulevard des Philosophes I saw the light 
.p700 
in the window at the corner. The blind was down, but I could 
imagine behind it Mrs. Haldin seated in the chair, in her 
usual attitude as if looking out for someone{ -- }which had 
lately acquired the poignant quality of a mad expectation. 
   I thought that I was sufficiently authorised by the light 
to knock at the door. The ladies had not retired as yet; I 
only hoped they would not have any visitors of their own 
nationality. That broken down retired official was to be 
found there sometimes in the evening. He was infinitely 
forlorn and wearisome by his mere dismal presence. I think 
these ladies tolerated his frequent visits because of an 
ancient friendship with Mr. Haldin the father, or something of 
that sort. I made up my mind that if I found him prosing away 
.p701 
there in his feeble voice I should remain but a very few 
minutes. 
   The door surprised me by swinging open before I could 
ring the bell. I was confronted by Miss Haldin in hat and 
jacket obviously on the point of going out. At that hour! 
For the doctor perhaps? 
   Her exclamation of welcome reassured me. It sounded as 
if I had been the very man she wanted to see. My curiosity 
was awakened. She drew me in and the faithful Anna, the 
elderly German maid, closed the outer door but did not go away 
afterwards. She remained near it as if in readiness to let me 
out presently. It appeared that Miss Haldin had been on the 
point of going out to find me. 
.p702 
   She spoke in a hurried manner very unusual with her. She 
would have gone straight and rung at Mrs. Ziegler's door, late 
as it was for Mrs. Ziegler's habits . . . . 
   Mrs. Ziegler, the widow of a very distinguished professor 
who was an intimate friend of mine, lets me have three rooms 
out of her very large and fine apartment, which she didn't give 
up after her husband's death; but I have my own entrance 
opening on the same landing. It was an arrangement of at least 
ten years' standing. I said that I was very glad thet I had 
the idea to . . . . 
   Miss Haldin made no motion to take off her outdoor things 
I observed her heightened colour, something pronouncedly 
resolute in her tone. Did I know where Mr. Razumov lived? 
   Where Mr. Razumov lived! Mr. Razumov! At this hour{ -- }so 
.p703 
urgently! I threw my arms up in sign of utter ignorance. I 
had not the slightest idea where he lived. If I could have 
foreseen her question only three hours ago, I might have 
ventured to ask him, on the pavement before the new Post Office 
building, and, possibly, he would have told me; but very 
possibly too he would have dismissed me rudely to mind my own 
business. And possibly, I thought, remembering that extraordinary 
hallucined, anguished and absent expression, he might have 
fallen down in a fit from the shock of being spoken to. I 
said nothing of all this to Miss Haldin, not even mentioning 
that I had a glimpse of the young man so recently. The 
impression had been so extremely unpleasant that I would have been
glad to forget it myself. 
.p704 
   {op"}I don't see where I could make inquiries" I 
murmured helplessly. I would have been glad to be of use in any way 
and would have set off to fetch any man young or old, for I 
had the greatest confidence in her common sense. {op"}What made 
you think of coming to me for that information?" I asked. 
   {op"}It wasn't exactly for that" she said in a low voice. She had the air 
of someone confronted by an unpleasant task. 
   {op"}Am I to understand that you must communicate with Mr. 
Razumov this evening?" 
   Natalia Haldin moved her head affirmatively; then after 
a glance at the door of the drawing-room said in French: 
   {op"}C'est Maman" and remained perplexed for a moment, always 
serious, not a girl to be put out by any imaginary difficulties.
.p705 
My curiosity was suspended on her lips which remained 
closed for a moment. What was Mr. Razumov's connection with 
this mention of her mother. Mrs. Haldin had not been informed 
of her son's friend's arrival in Geneva. 
   {op"}May I hope to see your mother this evening?" I inquired. 
   Miss Haldin extended her hand as if to bar the way. 
   {op"}She is in a terrible state of agitation. Oh you would 
not be able to detect . . . . It's inward but I who know mother I 
am appalled. I haven't the courage to face it any longer. It's 
all my fault; I suppose I cannot play a part; I've never before 
hidden anything from mother. There has never been an occasion 
for anything of that sort between us. But you know yourself 
the reason why I refrained from telling her at once of Mr. 
.p706 
Razumov's arrival here. You understand{ -- }don't you{ -- }owing 
to her unhappy state. And{ -- }there{ -- }I am no actress{ -- }my own 
feelings being strongly engaged, I somehow . . . . I don't know. 
She noticed something in my manner. She thought I was 
concealing something from her. She noticed my longer absences and
in fact while I expected to meet Mr. Razumov I used to stay away 
longer than usual, when I went out. Goodness knows what suspicions 
arose in her mind. You know that she has not been herself 
ever since. . . . So this evening she{ -- }who has been so awfully 
silent for weeks{ -- }began to talk all at once. She said that she did not 
want to reproach me; that I had my character as she had her 
own; that she did not want to pry into my affairs or even into 
my thoughts; for her part, she had never had
anything to conceal from her children. . . . cruel things to listen 
.p707 
to. And all this in her quiet voice, with that poor wasted 
face as calm as a stone. It was unbearable. 
   Miss Haldin talked in an undertone and more rapidly than 
I had ever heard her speak before. That in itself was 
disturbing. The anteroom being strongly lighted I could see under 
the veil the heightened colour of her face. She stood erect 
her left hand was resting lightly on a 
small table. The other hung by her side without stirring. Now and then 
she caught her breath slightly. 
   {op"}It was too startling. Just fancy!  She thought that I
was making preparations to leave her without saying anything. 
I knelt by the side of her chair and entreated her to think 
of what she was saying! She put her hand on my head{ -- }but she 
.p708 
persists in her delusion all the same. She had always thought 
that she was worthy of her children's confidence{ -- }but 
apparently it was not so. Her son could not trust her love if not 
her understanding{ -- }and now I was planning to abandon her in 
the same cruel and unjust manner{ -- }and so on, and so on. 
Nothing I could say . . . . . . It is morbid obstinacy. . . . She said 
that she felt there was something, some change in me. . . . If 
my convictions were calling me away why this secrecy, 
as though she had been a coward or a weakling not safe to trust{ -- }
{op"}As if my heart could play traitor to my children" she said . . . 
It was hardly to be borne. And she was smoothing my head all 
the time. . . . It was perfectly useless to protest. She is 
ill. Her very soul is . . . . . . " 
.p709 
   I did not venture to break the silence which fell between 
us. I looked into her eyes glistening through the veil. 
   {op"}I! Changed!" she exclaimed in the same low tone. {op"}My 
convictions calling me away! It was so cruel to hear that because 
my trouble is that I am weak and cannot see what I ought to do. 
You know that. And to end it all I did a selfish thing. To 
remove her suspicions of myself I told her of Mr. Razumov. It 
was selfish of me. You know we were completely right in 
agreeing to keep the knowledge away from her. Perfectly right. 
Directly I told her of our poor Victor's friend being here I 
saw how right we have been. She ought to have been prepared; 
but in my distress I just 
.p710 
blurted it out. Mother got terribly excited at once. How 
long has he been here? What did he know and why did he not come 
to see us at once this friend of her Victor. What did that 
mean? Was she not to be trusted even with such memories as 
there were left of her son? . . . . Just think how I felt seeing 
her white like a sheet, perfectly motionless with her thin 
hands gripping the arms of the chair. I told her it was all 
my fault." 
   I could imagine the motionless dumb figure of the mother 
in her chair, there, behind the door near which the daughter 
was talking to me. The silence in there seemed to call aloud 
for vengeance against a historical fact and the modern instances 
of its working. That view flashed through my mind, but I 
could not doubt that Miss Haldin had had an atrocious time of 
.p711 
it. I quite understood when she said that she could not face 
the night upon the impression of that scene. Mrs. Haldin had 
given way to most awful imaginings, to most fantastic and 
cruel suspicions. All that had to be lulled at all costs and 
without loss of time. It was no shock to me to learn that 
Miss Haldin had said to her {op"}I will go and bring him here at 
once." There was nothing absurd in that cry, no exaggeration 
of sentiment. I was not even doubtful in my {op"}Very well{ -- }but 
how?" 
   It was perfectly right that she should think of me, but 
what could I do in my ignorance of Mr. Razumov's quarters. 
   {op"}And to think he may be living near by, within a stone's 
throw perhaps" she exclaimed. 
.p712 
   I doubted it; but I would have gone off cheerfully to 
fetch him from the other end of Geneva. I supposed she was 
certain of my readiness since her first thought was to come to 
me. But the service she meant to ask of me really was to 
accompany her to the Chateau Borel. 
   On hearing this I had an unpleasant mental vision of the 
dark road, of the sombre grounds and the desolately suspicious 
aspect of that home of necromancy and intrigue and feminist 
adoration. I objected that Mrs. de S{---} most likely would 
know nothing of what we wanted to find out. Neither did I 
think it likely that the young man should be found there. I 
remembered my glimpse of his face and somehow gained the 
conviction that a man who looked worse than if he had seen the 
.p713 
dead would want to shut himself up somewhere where he could 
be alone. I felt a strange certitude that Mr. Razumov was 
going home when I saw him. 
   {op"}It is really of Peter Ivanovitch that I was thinking" 
said Miss Haldin quietly. 
   Ah! He of course would know. I looked at my watch. It 
was twenty minutes past nine only . . . Still. 
   {op"}I would try his hotel then" I advised. {op"}He has rooms at 
the Cosmopolitan somewhere on the top floor." 
   I did not offer to go myself simply from mistrust of the 
reception I should meet with. But I suggested the faithful 
Anna{ -- }with a note asking for the information. 
   Anna was still waiting by the door at the other end of 
.p714 
the room and we two were discussing the matter in whispers. 
Miss Haldin thought she must go herself. Anna was timid and 
slow. Time would be lost in bringing back the answer; and 
from that point of view it was getting late, for it was by no 
means certain that Mr. Razumov lived near by. 
   {op"}If I go myself" Miss Haldin argued, {op"}I can go 
straight to him from the hotel. And in any case I should have 
to go out because I must explain to Mr. Razumov 
personally{ -- }prepare 
him in a way. You have no idea of mother's state of 
mind." 
   Her colour came and went. She even thought that both for 
her mother's sake and for her own it was better that they 
should not be together for a little time. Anna whom her mother 
.p715 
liked would be at hand. 
   {op"}She could even take her sewing into the room. Mother 
won't mind" Miss Haldin continued as I followed her to the 
door. Then addressing in German the maid who opened it before 
us: {op"}You may tell my mother that this gentleman called and is 
gone with me to find Mr. Razumov. She must not be uneasy if 
I am away for some length of time." 
   We passed out quickly at the big house-door and she took 
deep breaths of the cool night air. {op"}I did not even ask you" 
she murmured. 
   {op"}I should think not" I said with a laugh. The manner of 
my reception by the great feminist could not be considered now. 
That he would be annoyed to see me and probably treat me to 
.p716 
some solemn insolence I had no doubt, but I supposed that he 
would not absolutely dare to throw me out. And that was all 
I cared for. {op"}Won't you take my arm?" I asked. 
   She did so without a word, and neither of us spoke till 
I let her go first into the great hall of the hotel. It was 
brilliantly lighted and with good many people lounging about. 
   {op"}I could very well go up there without you" I suggested. 
   {op"}I don't like to be left waiting in this place" she said 
in a low voice. {op"}I will come too." 
   I led her straight to the lift then. At the top floor 
the attendant directed us to the right: {op"}End of the corridor". 
   The walls were white, the carpet red, electric lights 
blazed in profusion and the emptiness, the silence, the closed 
.p717 
doors all alike and numbered made me think of the perfect 
order of some severely luxurious model penitentiary on the 
solitary confinement principle. Up there under the roof of 
that enormous pile for housing travellers no sound of any 
kind reached us; the thick crimson felt muffled our footsteps 
completely. We hastened on, not looking at each other till we 
found ourselves before the very last door of that long passage. 
Then our eyes met and we stood thus for a moment lending ear 
to a faint murmur of voices inside. 
   {op"}I suppose this is it" I whispered unnecessarily. I saw 
Miss Haldin's lips move, and after my sharp knock the murmur 
of voices ceased. A profound stillness lasted for a few 
seconds and then the door was brusquely opened by a short black 
.p718 
eyed woman in a red blouse with a great lot of nearly white 
hair done up negligently in an untidy and picturesque manner. 
Her thin  jetty eyebrows were drawn together. I learned 
afterwards with interest that she was the famous{ -- }or the notorious{ -- }
{ -- } Sofia Antonovna, but I was struck then by the quaint 
Mephistofelian character of her inquiring glance, because it was so 
curiously evil-less, so{ -- }I may say{ -- }un-devilish. It got 
softened still more as she looked up at Miss Haldin who stated in her
gentle even voice her wish to see Peter Ivanovitch for a moment. 
   {op"}I am Miss Haldin" she added. 
   At this with her brow completely smoothed out now, but 
without a word in answer, the woman in the red blouse walked 
away to a sofa and sat down, leaving the door wide open. 
.p719 
   And from the sofa her hands lying on her lap she watched 
us enter with her black glittering eyes. 
   Miss Haldin advanced into the middle of the room; I, 
faithful to my part of mere attendant, remained by the door 
after closing it behind me. The room, quite a large one, but 
with a low ceiling was scantily furnished, and an electric 
bulb with a porcelain shade pulled low down over a big table 
(with a very large map spread on it) left its distant parts 
in a dim, artificial twilight. Peter Ivanovitch was not to 
be seen, neither was Mr. Razumov present. But on the sofa, 
near Sofia Antonovna, a bony faced man with a goatee beard, leaned forward 
with his hands on his knees, staring frankly with faded, kindly eyes 
In a remote corner a bulky shape and a broad pale face could be made out, 
.p720 
uncouth and as if insecure on the low seat on which it rested. 
The only person known to me was little Julius Laspara, who 
seemed to have been poring over the map with his feet twined 
tightly round the chair-legs. He got down briskly and bowed to 
Miss Haldin looking absurdly like a small, hook-nosed boy 
with a beautiful false pepper-and-salt beard. He advanced 
offering his seat which Miss Haldin declined. She had only 
come in for a moment to say a few words to Peter Ivanovitch. 
   His high pitched voice became 
.p721 
painfully accented in the room. 
   {op"}Strangely enough I was thinking of you this very 
after-noon, Natalia Viktorovna. I met Mr. Razumov. I asked him to 
write me an article on anything he liked. You could translate 
it into English. With such a teacher." 
   He nodded complimentarily in my direction. At the name of Razumov an 
indescribable sound, a sort of feeble squeak, as of some angry 
small animal, was heard in the corner occupied by the man who 
seemed much too bulky for the chair on which he sat. I did not hear
what Miss Haldin said. It was Laspara who spoke again. 
   {op"}It's time to do something Natalia Viktorovna. But I 
suppose you have your own ideas. Why not write something 
yourself. Suppose you came to see us, soon? We could talk it 
.p722 
over. Any advice . . . ." 
   Again I did not catch Miss Haldin's words. It was Laspara's 
voice once more. 
   {op"}Peter Ivanovitch? He's retired for a moment into the 
other room. We are all waiting for him." 
   The great man entering at that moment looked bigger, 
taller, quite imposing in a long dressing-gown of some dark 
stuff. It descended in straight lines down to his feet. He 
suggested a monk or a prophet, a robust figure of some desert-
dweller{ -- }something Asiatic; and the dark glasses in 
conjunction with this costume made him more mysterious than ever 
in that subdued light. 
   Little Laspara went back to his chair to look at the map, 
.p723 
the only brilliantly lit object in the room. Even from my 
distant position by the door I could make out, mainly by the 
shape of the blue part representing the water that it was a map 
of the Baltic Provinces. Peter Ivanovitch exclaimed slightly, 
advancing towards Miss Haldin, checked himself on perceiving 
me, very vaguely no doubt, and peered with his dark bespectacled 
stare. He must have recognised me by my grey hair because with 
a marked shrug of his broad shoulders he turned to Miss Haldin, 
in benevolent indulgence. He seized her hand and put his 
other big paw like a lid over it. 
   While those two standing in the middle of the floor were 
exchanging a few inaudible phrases no one else moved in the 
room; Laspara with his back to us, kneeling on the chair, his 
.p724 
elbows propped on the big scale map, the shadowy enormity in the 
corner, the frankly-staring man with the goatee on the sofa, 
the woman in the red blouse by his side{ -- }not one of them 
stirred. I suppose that really they had no time for 
Miss Haldin withdrew her hand immediately and before I was 
ready for her, was moving to the door. A disregarded westerner 
I threw it open hurriedly and followed her out, my last 
glance as I was closing the door leaving them all motionless 
in their varied poses. Peter Ivanovitch alone standing 
up, with his dark glasses like an enormous blind teacher, 
and behind him the vivid patch of light of the coloured 
map, pored over by the diminutive Laspara. 
   Later on, much later on, at the time of the newspaper 
.p725 
rumours (they were vague and soon died out) of an abortive 
military conspiracy in Russia I remembered the glimpse I had 
of that motionless group with its central figure. Planned as 
an attempt to seize power it was to break out at a great 
review. No details ever came out; but it was known that the 
revolutionary parties abroad had given their assistance, had 
sent emissaries in advance; that even money was found to dispatch 
a steamer with a cargo of arms and conspirators. And while my 
eyes scanned the imperfect disclosures (in which the world 
was not much interested) I thought that the old settled Europe 
had been given in my person attending that Russian girl 
some-thing like a glimpse behind the scenes. A short, strange 
glimpse on the top floor of a great hotel of all places in the 
.p726 
world: the great man himself, the motionless shadow in the 
corner of the slayer of spies and gendarmes, Yakovlitch the 
veteran of ancient terrorist campains, the woman with her 
hair as white as mine and the lively black eyes all in a 
mysterious half light, with the strongly-lighted map of Russia 
on the table. The woman I had the opportunity to see again. 
As we were waiting for the lift she came hurrying along, 
with her eyes fastened on Miss Haldin's face, and drew her aside 
as if for a confidential communication. It was not long. 
A few words only. 
   Going down in the lift Natalia Haldin did not break the 
silence. It was only when out of the hotel and as we moved 
along the quay in the fresh darkness spangled by the quay lights 
reflected in the black water of the little port on our left hand 
.p727 
and with lofty piles of hotels on our right that she spoke. 
   {op"}That was Sophia Antonovna{ -- }you know the woman . . ." 
   {op"}Yes. I know{ -- }the famous . . . ." 
   {op"}The same. It appears that after we went out Peter 
Ivanovitch told them why I had come. That was the reason she 
came out after us. She named herself to me and then she said
{ -- } You are the sister of a brave man who shall be remembered. 
You may see better times.{ -- }I told her I hoped to see the 
time when all this would be forgotten, even if the name of my 
brother were to be forgotten too. Something moved me to say 
that{ -- }but you understand?" 
   {op"}Yes" I said. {op"}You think of the era of concord and 
justice. The destructors should be anonymous." 
.p728 
   {op"}Yes. There is too much hate and revenge in that work. 
It must be done. It is a sacrifice{ -- }and so let it be all the 
greater. Destruction is too much the work of anger. Let the 
tyrants and the slayers be forgotten together and only the 
reconstructors be remembered." 
   {op"}And did Sophia Antonovna agree with you?" I asked 
sceptically. 
   {op"}She did not say anything except: it is good for you to 
believe in love. I should think she understood me. Then she 
asked me if I hoped to see Mr. Razumov presently. I said: I 
trusted I could manage to bring him to see my mother this 
evening, as my mother had learned of his being here and was 
morbidly impatient to learn if he could tell us something of 
.p729 
Victor. He was the only friend of my brother we knew of and 
a great intimate. She said: Oh! Your brother{ -- }yes. Please 
tell Mr. Razumov that I have made known the story which came 
to me from St. Petersburg. It concerns your brother's arrest," she 
added. He was betrayed by a man of the people who has 
since hanged himself. Please tell Mr. Razumov 
that Sophia Antonovna sends him her greetings. I am going 
away early in the morning{ -- }far away, she 
   And Miss Haldin added after a moment of silence: 
   {op"}I was so moved by what I heard so unexpectedly that I 
simply could not speak to you before." 
   She walked slowly, as if tired out suddenly, her head 
drooped; from the windows of a building with terraces and 
.p730 
balconies came the banal sound of hotel music. Before the low 
mean portals of the Casino two red posters blazed under the 
electric lamps, with a cheap provincial effect. And the 
emptiness of the quays, the desert aspect of the streets had an 
air of hypocritical respectability and of inexpressible 
dreariness. 
   I had taken for granted she had obtained the address and 
let myself be guided by her. On the Mont Blanc bridge where 
a few dark figures seemed lost in the wide and long perspective 
defined by the lights she said: 
   {op"}It isn't very far from our house. I somehow thought it 
couldn't be. The address is Rue du Carouge. I think it may 
be one of these big new houses for artisans." 
.p731 
   She took my arm confidingly, familiarly and accelerated 
her pace. There was something primitive in all her proceedings. 
She did not think of the resources of civilisation. A late 
tram-car overtook us; a row of fiacres stood by the railing of the 
gardens. It never entered her head to make use of these 
conveyances. Neither did it enter mine. She was too hurried 
perhaps and as to myself{ -- }well she had taken my arm 
confidingly. As we were ascending the easy incline of the Corraterie, 
all the shops shuttered and no light in any of the windows { -- }
(as if all the mercenary population had fled at the end of the 
day) she said tentatively: 
   {op"}I could run in to have a look at mother. It would not 
be much out of the way." 
.p732 
   I dissuaded her. If Mrs. Haldin really expected to see 
Razumov that night it would have been unwise to show  herself 
without him. The sooner we got hold of the young man and 
brought him along to calm her mother's agitation the better. 
She assented to my reasoning and we crossed diagonally the 
Place de Theatre all grey with its floor of slabs of stone under 
the electric lamps and the lonely equestrian statue all black 
in the middle. In the Rue de Carouge we were in the poorer 
quarters and approaching the outskirts of the town. Vacant 
building plots alternated with high new houses. At the corner 
of a side street cutting its unpaved roadway through a dark 
wilderness of waste ground, the crude light of a whitewashed 
shop fell into the night, fanlike, through a wide doorway. 
.p733 
One could see from a distance the inner wall with its scantily 
furnished shelves, and the deal counter painted brown. That 
was the house. Approaching it along the dark stretch of a fence 
of tarred planks we saw the narrow pallid face of the cut angle, 
five windows high, without a gleam in them and crowned by 
the heavy shadow of a jutting roof slope. 
   {op"}We must inquire in the shop" Miss Haldin directed me. 
   A sallow, thinly whiskered man wearing a dingy 
white collar and a frayed tie, laid down a black smudgy 
newspaper and leaning familiarly on both elbows far over the bare counter 
answered that the person I was inquiring for 
was indeed his {op"}locataire" on the third floor, but that for 
the moment he was out. 
.p734 
   {op"}For the moment" I repeated after a glance at Miss Haldin. 
{op"}Does that mean that you expect him back at once." 
   He was very gentle, with ingratiating eyes and soft lips. 
He smiled faintly as though he knew all about everything. 
Mr. Razumov after being absent all day had returned early in 
the evening. He was very surprised about half an hour or a 
little more since, to see him come down again. Mr Razumov left his 
key, and in the course of some words which passed between them 
had remarked that he was going out because he 
needed air. 
   From behind the bare counter he went on smiling 
at us, his head held between his hands. Air. Air. But 
whether that meant a long or a short absence it was difficult 
.p735 
to say. The night was very close certainly. 
   After a pause his ingratiating eyes turned to the door 
he added: 
   {op"}The storm shall drive him in." 
   {op"}There's going to be a storm?" I asked. 
   {op"}Why{ -- }yes!" 
   As if to confirm his words we heard a very distant, deep, 
rumbling noise. 
   Consulting Miss Haldin by a glance I saw her so reluctant 
to give up her quest that I asked the shopkeeper, in case Mr. 
Razumov came home within half an hour, to beg him to remain 
downstairs in the shop. We would look in again presently. 
   For all answer he moved his head imperceptibly. The 
.p736 
approval of Miss Haldin was expressed by her silence. We walked 
slowly down the street, away from the town; the low gardens 
walls of the modest villas doomed to demolition were overhung by the boughs of trees and 
masses of foliage lighted from below by gas lamps. The 
violent and monotonous noise of the icy Arve falling over a low 
dam swept towards us with a chilly draft of air over a great open 
space where a double line of lamp-lights defined 
a street without houses. But on the other shore 
overhung by the thunder cloud a 
solitary dim light, low in the complete 
darkness, seemed to watch us with a 
.p737 
steady stare. When we had strolled as far as the 
bridge, I said: 
   {op"}We had better get back." . . . 
   In the shop the sickly man was studying the smudgy 
newspaper now spread out largely on the counter. He just raised 
his head when I looked in and shook it negatively pursing his 
lips. I rejoined Miss Haldin outside at once and we moved off at 
brisk pace. She remarked that she would send Anna with a note 
the first thing in the morning. I respected her taciturnity, 
silence being perhaps the best way to show my concern. 
   The semi-rural street we followed on our 
return changed gradually to the usual town thoroughfare 
broad and deserted. We did not meet four people altogether 
and the way seemed interminable, because my companion's natural 
.p738 
anxiety had communicated itself sympathetically to me. At last 
we turned into the Boulevard des Philosophes more wide 
more empty, more dead{ -- }the very desolation of 
slumbering respectability. At the sight of the two 
lighted windows very conspicuous from afar I had the mental 
vision of Mrs. Haldin in her armchair keeping a dreadful 
tormenting vigil under the evil spell of an arbitrary rule, a 
victim of tyranny and revolution, a sight at once cruel and 
absurd. 
.p738 
{ti}Razumov. 
{pt}Part IV 
{cn}III 
{cop}{op"}You will come in for a moment" said Natalia Haldin. 
   I demurred. on account of the late hour. {op"}You know Mother likes you so 
much." She insisted. 
.p739 
   {op"}I will just come in to hear how your mother is." 
   She said as if to herself, {op"}I don't even know 
whether she will believe that I could not find Mr. Razumov{ -- }since 
she has taken it into her head that I am concealing something 
from her. You may be able to persuad her . . ." 
   {op"}Your mother may mistrust me too" I observed. 
   {op"}You! Why? What could you have to conceal from her? 
You are not a Russian nor a conspirator. . . . " 
   I felt profoundly my European remoteness and said nothing 
but I made up my mind to come in, and play my part of helpless 
spectator to the end. The distant rolling of thunder in the 
valley of the Rhone was coming nearer to the sleeping town of 
prosaic virtues and universal hospitality. We crossed the 
.p740 
street opposite the great dark gateway and Miss Haldin rang at 
the door of the appartement. It was opened almost instantly 
as if the elderly maid had been waiting in the anteroom for our 
return. Her flat physiognomy had an air of 
satisfaction. The gentleman was there she declared while closing the 
door. 
   Neither of us understood. Miss Haldin turned round 
brusquely to her. {op"}Who?" 
   {op"}Herr Razumov" she explained. 
   She had heard enough of our conversation before we left 
to know why her young mistress was going out. Therefore when 
the gentleman gave his name at the door she admitted 
him at once. 
.p741 
   {op"}No one could have foreseen that" Miss Haldin murmured 
with her serious grey eyes fixed upon mine. And remembering 
the expression of the young man's face seen not much more than 
four hours ago the look as of a haunted somnambulist, I 
wondered with a sort of awe. 
   {op"}You asked my mother first" Miss Haldin inquired of the 
maid. 
   {op"}No. I announced the gentleman" she answered, surprised 
at our troubled faces. 
   {op"}Still" I said in an undertone {op"}Your mother was prepared." 
   {op"}Yes. But he has no idea . . . ." 
   It seemed to me she doubted his tact. To her question 
how long the gentleman had been with her mother the maid 
.p742 
told us that {it}der Herr{ro} had been in the drawing room no more 
than a short quarter of an hour. 
   She waited a moment then withdrew, looking a little scared. 
Miss Haldin gazed at me in silence. 
   {op"}As things have turned out" I said, {op"}you happen to know
exactly what your brother's friend has to tell your mother. 
And surely after that . . ." 
   {op"}Yes" said Natalia Haldin slowly. {op"}I only 
wonder, as I was not there when he came, if it wouldn't be better 
not to interrupt now." 
   We remained silent and I suppose we both strained our 
ears, but no sound reached us through the closed door. The 
.p743 
features of Miss Haldin expressed a painful irresolution; she 
made a movement, as if to go in, but checked herself. She 
had heard, footsteps on the other 
side of the door. It came open and Razumov without pausing 
stepped out into the anteroom. The fatigue of that day and the 
struggle with himself had changed him so much that perhaps I 
would have hesitated to recognise that face which only a few 
hours before, when he brushed against me in front of the Post 
Office, had been startling enough but quite different. It 
had been not so livid then, and its 
eyes not so sombre. They certainly looked more sane now 
but there was upon them the shadow of something consciously 
evil. 
.p744 
   I speak of that, because, at first, their glance fell on me 
though without any sort of recognition or even comprehension. 
I was simply in the line of his stare. I don't know if he 
had heard the bell or expected to see anybody. He was going 
out, I believe; and I do not think that he saw Miss Haldin 
till she advanced towards him a step or two. Then his 
expression changed. He did not notice the hand 
she offered him. 
   {op"}It's you Natalia Victorovna . . . . Perhaps you are 
surprised{ -- }at this late hour. But, you see, I remembered the 
conversations in that garden. I thought 
really it was your wish that I should{ -- }without loss of time . . 
.p745 
so I came. No other reason. Simply to tell. . . . 
   He spoke with difficulty, I noticed that, and remembered 
his declaration to the man in the shop that he was going out 
because he {op"}needed air". If that was his object then 
it was clear that he had miserably failed. With downcast 
eyes and lowered head he made an effort to pick up the 
strangled phrase. 
   {op"}To tell what I have heard myself only today{ -- }today . ." .  
   Through the door he had not closed I had a view of the drawing room 
It was lighted up only by a shaded lamp{ -- }Mrs. Haldin's eyes could 
.p746 
not support either gas or electricity. It was a 
comparatively big room and in contrast with the strongly lighted anteroom 
its length was lost in semi-transparent gloom backed by heavy 
shadows; and on that ground I saw the fine motionless profile 
of Mrs. Haldin's bloodless face inclined slightly forward 
with a pale hand resting on the arm of the chair. 
   She did not move. With the window before her she had no 
longer that attitude with suggested expectation. The blind 
was down; and outside there was only the night sky harbouring 
a thunder cloud and the town indifferent and hospitable in its 
cold, almost scornful, toleration{ -- }a strange town of refuge 
to which all these sorrows and hopes were nothing. Her white 
head was bowed. 
.p747 
   The thought that the real drama of autocracy is not played 
on the great stage of politics came to me as, fated to be a 
spectator, I had this other glimpse behind the scenes, 
something more profound than the words and gestures of the public 
play. I had the certitude that this mother after having heard 
now all that was to be known of her son's fate refused in her 
heart to give him up after all. It was more than Rachel's 
inconsolable mourning, it was something deeper, more 
inaccessible in its frightful tranquility. Lost in the ill-defined 
mass of the high-backed chair, her white, inclined profile 
suggested the contemplation of something in her lap as though 
a beloved head were resting there. 
   I had this glimpse behind the scenes and then Miss Haldin 
.p748 
passing by the young man shut the door. It was not done 
without hesitation. For a moment I thought that she would go to 
her mother, but she sent in only an anxious glance. Perhaps 
if Mrs. Haldin had moved . . . . but no. There was in the 
immobility of that white profile 
the dreadful aloofness of suffering without remedy. 
   Meantime the young man kept his eyes fixed on floor. The 
thought that he would have to repeat the story he had told 
already was intolerable to him. He had expected to find the 
two women together. And then, he had said to himself, it 
would be over for all time{ -- }for all time. {op"}It's lucky I don't 
believe in another world" he had thought cynically. 
   Alone in his room he had regained a certain measure of composure by writing 
.p749 
in his secret diary. He was aware of the danger of that 
strange self-indulgence. He alludes to it himself, but he could 
not refrain. It calmed him{ -- }it reconciled him to his 
existence. He sat there scribbling by the light of a solitary 
candle till it occurred to him that having heard the 
explanation of Haldin's arrest as put forward by Sophia Antonovna 
it behoved him to tell these ladies himself; since they 
were certain to hear the tale through some other channel; and then 
his abstention would look strange, not only to the mother and 
sister of Haldin but to other people also. Having come to 
this conclusion he did not discover in himself any marked 
reluctance to face the necessity; and very soon an anxiety to be done
with it began to torment him. He looked at his watch. 
.p750 
No. It was not absolutely too late. 
   He was calmed by his self communion; that dread which had 
kept him for days from facing Miss Haldin, 
was gone. He felt 
nothing of it, perhaps simply for the reason that now he had 
a story to tell. It had been settled for him; there was 
nothing to do but to have it over and done with. The 
fact that these were women he was going to meet did not 
trouble him especially. As a matter of fact he did not recognise 
women as women. There had been literally no feminine 
influence in his life. Women were human beings for him and nothing 
more, somewhat in the background, not to be thought of in any 
special way. He simply knew nothing of them in any relation, 
.p751 
no woman had ever influenced a dream of his, taken up a moment of 
his time, or awakened any of his dormant feelings; no thought 
of woman had enriched his life by a touch of amenity, of colour, 
of reverie. It may be said that, in a 
manner, he had never seen a woman, for even Sophia Antonovna 
was a conspirator, a revolutionist, a dangerous person with 
whom he must be on his guard more than with anybody else{ -- }
nothing more. 
   The fifteen minutes with Mrs. Haldin were like the 
revenge of the unknown; that white face, that weak, distinct 
voice, that head, at first turned to him eagerly then, after a while, 
bowed again and motionless{ -- }in the dim still light of the room 
in which his words which he tried to subdue resounded so loudly{ -- }
.p752 
had troubled him like some strange discovery. And there 
seemed to be a secret obstinacy in that sorrow, something he 
could not understand; at any rate something he had not 
expected. Was it hostile? But it did not matter. Nothing could 
touch him now; in the eyes of revolutionists there was now 
no shadow on his past. The phantom of Haldin had been indeed 
walked over, was left behind lying powerless and passive on 
the pavement covered with snow. And this was the phantom's 
mother consumed with grief and white as a ghost. He had felt a 
pitying surprise. But that of course was of no importance. 
Mothers did not matter. He could not shake off the poignant 
impression of that silent, quiet, white haired woman, but a 
sort of sternness crept into his thoughts. These were the 
.p753 
consequences. Well, what of it? {op"}Am I then on a bed of 
roses?" he had exclaimed to himself, sitting at some distance 
with his eyes fixed upon that figure of sorrow. He had said 
all he had to say to her and when he had finished she had not 
uttered a word. She had turned away her head while he was 
speaking and it was more. The 
silence which had fallen on his last words had lasted for five minutes or more. What did it mean? Before its 
incomprehensible character he became conscious 
of anger in his stern mood, the old anger against Haldin 
reawakened by the contemplation of Haldin's mother. And was it 
not something like enviousness which gripped his heart as if 
of a privilege denied to him alone of all the men that had 
ever passed through this world? It was the other who had 
.p754 
attained to repose and yet continued to exist in the affection of that 
mourning old woman, in the thoughts of all these people posing 
for lovers of humanity. It was impossible to get rid of him. 
{op"}It's myself that I have given up to destruction" thought 
Razumov. {op"}He has induced me to do it. I can't shake him off." 
   Alarmed by that discovery he got up and strode out of 
the silent dim room with its silent old woman in the chair, 
that mother! He never looked back. It was frankly a flight. 
But on opening the door he saw his retreat cut off. There was 
the sister. He had never forgotten the sister, only he had 
not expected to see her then{ -- }or ever any more perhaps. He 
had looked upon her as out of the way, somewhere within, 
avoided for good. Her presence in the anteroom was as 
.p755 
unforeseen as the apparition of her brother had been. Razumov gave a 
start as though he had discovered himself cleverly trapped. 
He tried to smile but could not manage it and lowered his 
eyes. {op"}Must I repeat that silly story now" he asked himself 
and felt a sinking sensation. Nothing solid had passed his 
lips since the day before but he was not in a state to analyse 
the origins of his weakness. He meant to take up his hat and 
depart with as few words as possible, but Miss Haldin's swift 
movement to shut the door took him by surprise. He half 
turned after her but without raising his eyes, passively, 
just as a feather might stir in the disturbed air. The next 
moment she was back in the place she had started from, with 
another half turn on his part, so that they came again into 
.p756 
the same relative positions. 
   {op"}Yes, yes" she said hurriedly. {op"}I am very grateful to 
you Kirylo Sidorovitch for coming at once{ -- }like this. . . .  Only I wish 
I had . . . .  Did mother tell you?" 
   {op"}I wonder what she could have told me that I did not know 
before" he said obviously to himself but perfectly audibly. {op"}
Because I {it}did{ro} know it" he added louder as if in despair. {op"}I always 
knew it." 
   He raised his head then. He had such a strong sense of Natalia 
Haldin's presence that to look at her he felt would be a relief. It 
was she who had been haunting him now. He had suffered that 
persecution ever since she had suddenly appeared before him in the 
garden of the Villa Borel. with an extended hand and the name of her brother on her lips. The anteroom which was a larger 
.p757 
room than is usual contained a row of hooks on the wall nearest 
to the outer door while against the wall opposite there stood 
a small dark table and one chair. The paper bearing a very 
faint design was all but white. The light of an electric bulb 
high up under the ceiling searched that clear square box into 
its four bare corners, crudely, without shadows, a strange 
stage for an obscure drama. 
   {op"}What do you mean?" asked Miss Haldin. {op"}What is it that 
you knew always?" 
   He raised to her his face pale, full of unexpressed 
suffering. But that look in his eyes of a dull absent 
obstinacy which struck and surprised everybody he was talking to, 
began to pass away. It was as though he were coming to himself 
.p758 
in the awakened consciousness of that marvellous harmony 
of feature, of lines, of glances, of voices, which made of the 
girl before him a being so rare, outside and, as it were, 
above the common notion of beauty. 
He looked at her so long that she coloured slightly. 
   {op"}What is it that you knew?" she repeated vaguely. 
   That time he managed a smile. 
   {op"}Indeed if it had not been for a word of greeting or two 
I would doubt whether your mother is aware at all of my existence. 
You understand." 
   Natalia Haldin nodded; her hands moved slightly by her 
side. 
.p760 
   {op"}Yes. Is it not heart breaking? She has not shed a tear 
yet{ -- }not a single tear up to now? . . . . ." 
   {op"}Not a tear! And you Natalia Viktorovna? You have been 
able to cry?" 
   {op"}I have. And then I am young enough Kirylo Sidorovitch 
to believe in the future. 
But when I see my mother so terribly distracted, I almost 
forget everything. 
I ask myself whether one should feel proud{ -- }or only 
resigned. We had such a lot of people coming to see us. There 
were utter strangers who wrote asking for permission to call 
to present their respects. It was impossible to keep our door 
.p761 
shut for ever. You know Peter Ivanovitch himself . . . . Oh 
yes there was much sympathy but there were persons who exulted 
openly at that death. Then, when I was left alone with poor 
mother, all this seemed so wrong in spirit, something not 
worth the price she is paying for it. But directly I heard 
you were here in Geneva Kirylo Sidorovitch I felt that you 
were the only person who could assist me. . . ." 
   {op"}In comforting a bereaved mother? Yes!" he broke in in 
a manner which made her open her clear unsuspecting eyes. 
{op"}But there is a question of fitness. Has this occurred to 
you?" 
   There was a breathlessness in his utterance which 
contrasted with the monstrous hint of mockery in his intention. 
.p762 
   {op"}Why!" whispered Natalia Haldin, with feeling. {op"}Who 
more fit than you?" 
   He had a convulsive movement of exasperation but 
controlled himself. 
   {op"}Indeed! Directly you heard I was in Geneva, before even
seeing me? It is another proof of that confidence which . . . ." 
   This was angry mockery but all at once his tone changed 
became more incisive and more detached. 
   {op"}Men are poor creatures Natalia Viktorovna. They have 
no intuition of sentiment. In order to speak fittingly to a 
mother of her lost son one must have had some experience of 
the filial relation. It is not the case with me{ -- }if you 
must know the whole truth. Your hopes have to deal here with 
.p763 
{op"}a breast unwarmed by any affection" as the poet says. . . That
does not mean it is insensible" he added in a lowered tone. 
   {op"}I am certain your heart is not unfeeling" said Miss 
Haldin softly. 
   {op"}No. It is not as hard as a stone" he went on in the same 
lowered introspective voice and looking as if his heart were 
lying as heavy as a stone in that unwarmed breast of which he 
spoke. {op"}No not so hard. But how to prove what you give me
credit for{ -- }ah that's another question. No one has ever 
expected such a thing from me before. No one. Who my 
tenderness would have been of any use to. And now you come. You!
Now! No Natalia Viktorovna. It's too late. You come too 
late. You must expect nothing from me." 
.p764 
   She recoiled from him a little, though he had made no 
movement, no gesture, but as if she had seen some change in 
his face charging his words with the significance of some 
hidden sentiment they shared together. To me, the silent spectator, they 
looked in a moment of sudden insight like two people becoming 
conscious of a spell which had been lying on them ever since 
they first set eyes on each other. Had either of them cast a 
glance, then, in my direction I would have opened the door 
quietly and gone out. But neither did; and I remained, every 
fear of indiscretion lost in the sense of my enormous 
remoteness from their captivity within the sombre horizon of Russian 
problems, the boundary of their eyes, of their feelings; the prison 
of their souls. 
.p765 
   Frank, courageous, Miss Haldin controlled her voice in the 
midst of her slight trouble. 
   {op"}What can this mean?" she asked as if speaking to herself. 
   {op"}It may mean that you have given yourself up to vain 
imaginings while I have managed to remain amongst the truth of 
things and the realities of life{ -- }our Russian life{ -- }such as 
they are." 
   {op"}They are cruel" she murmured. 
   {op"}And ugly. Don't forget that{ -- }and ugly. Look where you 
like. Look near you, here abroad where you are and then look 
back at home, whence you came." 
   {op"}You must look beyond the present." Her tone had an 
ardent conviction. 
.p766 
   {op"}The blind can do that best. I have had the misfortune 
to be born clear eyed. And if you only knew what strange 
things I have seen! What amazing and unexpected apparitions. . . . 
But why talk of all this!" 
   {op"}On the contrary; I want to talk of all this with you" 
she protested with grave serenity. The sombre humours of her 
brother's friend left her unaffected as though that bitterness 
that suppressed anger were the signs of an indignant rectitude. 
She saw that he was not an ordinary personality and perhaps she 
did not want him to be other than he appeared to her trustful 
eyes. {op"}Yes with you especially" she insisted. {op"}With you of 
all the Russian people in the world. . . ." A faint smile dwelt 
for a moment on her lips. {op"}I am like poor mother in a way. I 
.p767 
too seem unable to give up our beloved dead, who, don't forget, 
was all in all to us. I don't want to abuse your sympathy{ -- }
but you must understand that it is in you that we can find 
all that is left of his generous soul." 
   I was looking at him; not a muscle of his face moved in 
the least. And yet even at the time I did not suspect him of 
insensibility. It was a sort of rapt expression. Then he 
stirred slightly. 
   {op"}You are going Kirylo Sidorovitch?" she asked. 
   {op"}I! going? Where? Oh yes, but I must tell you first. . . . 
His voice was muffled and he forced himself to produce it with 
visible repugnance as if speech were something disgusting or 
deadly. {op"}That story, you know{ -- }the story I heard this 
.p768 
afternoon. . . ." 
   {op"}I know the story already" she said sadly. 
   {op"}You know it! Have you correspondents in Petersburg too?" 
   {op"}No. It's Sophia Antonovna. I have seen her just now. 
She sends you her greetings. She is going away tomorrow." 
   He had lowered at last his fascinated glance,; she too 
was looking down, and standing thus before each other in the 
glaring light, between the four bare walls they seemed brought 
out from the confused immensity of the Eastern borders to be 
exposed cruelly to the observation of my Western eyes. And I 
observed them. There was nothing else to do. My existence 
seemed so utterly forgotten by these two that I dared not now 
make a movement. And I thought to myself that of course they 
.p769 
had to come together, the sister and the friend of that dead 
man. The ideas, the hopes, the aspirations, the cause of 
Freedom, expressed in their common affection for Victor Haldin 
the moral victim of autocracy{ -- }all that must draw them to 
each other fatally. Her very ignorance and his loneliness 
to which he had alluded so strangely must work to that end. 
And indeed I saw that the work was done already. Of course. 
It was manifest that they must have been thinking of each other 
for a long time before they met. She had the letter from 
that beloved brother kindling her imagination by the severe 
praise attached to that one name; and it was impossible to 
imagine that the two women should have been kept out of the 
intercourse between such intimate political friends. And if 
.p770 
he was at all attached to that friend, if he had any 
admiration for his character, it was enough to guide his thoughts to 
that friend's sister. She was no stranger to him when he saw 
her first; and to see that exceptional girl was enough. The 
only cause for surprise was his strange and gloomy aloofness 
before her clearly expressed welcome. But he was young and 
however austere and devoted to his revolutionary ideals he 
was not blind. The period of reserve was over; he was coming 
forward in his own way. I could not mistake the significance 
of this late visit; for, in what he had to say, there was 
nothing urgent. The true cause dawned upon me: he had 
discovered that he needed her{ -- }whether he understood it or not{ -- }and 
she perhaps was moved by the same feeling. It was the second 
.p771 
time that I saw them together and I knew that the next time I 
would not be there, either remembered or forgotten. I would 
have virtually ceased to exist for both these young people. 
   I made this discovery in a very few moments. Meantime, 
Natalia Haldin was telling Razumov briefly of our 
peregrinations from one end of Geneva to the other. While speaking she 
raised her hands above her head to untie her veil and that 
movement displayed for an instant the strength and the grace 
of her youthful figure clad in the simplest of mourning. In 
the transparent shadow the hat rim threw on her face her gray 
eyes had an enticing lustre. Her voice with its unfeminine yet 
exquisite timbre was steady and she spoke quickly, frank 
unembarrassed. As she justified her action by the mental state 
.p772 
of her mother a spasm of pain marred the generously confiding 
harmony of her features. I perceived that with his downcast 
eyes he had the air of a man who is listening to a strain of 
music rather than to articulated speech. And in the same way, 
after she had ceased, he seemed to listen yet, motionless as 
if under the spell of suggestive sound. He came to himself 
muttering: 
   {op"}Yes, yes. She has not shed a tear. She did not seem 
to hear what I was saying. I might have told her
anything. She looked as if no longer belonging to this world" 
.p773 
   Miss Haldin gave signs of profound distress. Her voice 
faltered. {op"}You don't know how bad it has come to be. She 
expects now to see {it}him!" The veil dropped from her fingers 
and she clasped her hands in anguish. {op"}It will end by her seeing 
him" she cried. 
   Razumov raised his head sharply and attached 
on her a prolonged thoughtful glance. 
   {op"}H'm. That's very possible" he muttered in a peculiar 
tone as if giving his opinion on a matter of fact. {op"}I wonder 
what. . . . " He checked himself. 
   {op"}That would be the end. Her mind will be gone then and 
her spirit will follow" 
.p774 
Miss Haldin unclasped her hands and let them fall by her side. 
   {op"}You think so?" he queried profoundly. Miss Haldin's lips 
were slightly parted. Something unexpected and unfathomable 
in that young man's character has fascinated her from the 
first. {op"}No! There's neither truth nor consolation to be got 
from the phantoms of the dead" he added after a weighty pause. 
{op"}I might have told her something true; for instance that your 
brother meant to save his life{ -- }to escape, There can be no doubt of that. But 
I did not." 
   {op"}You did not! But why?" 
   {op"}I don't know. Other thoughts came into my head" he 
answered. An extraordinary coolness had succeeded the confusion 
and trouble of the first moments of their meeting; 
.p775 
But even then he seemed to me to be watching 
himself inwardly, as though he were 
trying to count his own heart beats while his eyes never for 
a moment left the face of the girl. {op"}You were not there" he 
continued. {op"}I had made up my mind never to see you again." 
   This seemed to take her breath away for a moment. 
   {op"}You. . . .  How is it possible!" 
   {op"}You may well ask. . . .  However I think that I refrained 
from telling your mother from prudence. I might have assured 
her that in the last conversation he held as a free man he 
mentioned you both. . . ." 
   {op"}That last conversation was with you" she struck in her 
deep moving voice. {op"}Some day you must . . . . " 
.p776 
   {op"}It was with me. Of you he said that you had trustful 
eyes. And why I have not been able to forget that phrase I 
don't know. It meant that there is in you no guile, no 
deception, no falsehood, no suspicion{ -- }nothing in your heart that
could give you a conception of a living, acting speaking lie 
if ever it came in your way. That you were a predestined 
victim. . . .  What a devilish suggestion!" 
   The convulsive uncontrolled tone of the last words 
disclosed the precarious hold he had over himself. It was like 
a man defying his own dizziness in high places and tottering 
suddenly on the very edge of the precipice. Miss Haldin 
pressed her hand to her breast. The dropped black veil lay 
on the floor between them. Her movement steadied him. He 
.p777 
looked intently on that hand till it descended slowly and then 
raised again his eyes to her face. But he did not give her 
time to speak. 
   {op"}No? You don't understand? Very well." He had 
recovered his calm by a miracle of will. {op"}So you talked with 
Sophia Antonovna." 
   {op"}Yes, Sophia Antonovna told me. . . ." Miss Haldin stopped, 
wonder growing in her wide eyes. 
   {op"}H'm. That's the respectable enemy" he muttered as though 
he were alone. 
   {op"}The tone of her references to you was extremely friendly" 
remarked Miss Haldin after waiting for a while. 
   {op"}Is that your impression? And she the most intelligent of 
.p778 
the lot too. Things then are going as well as possible. 
Everything conspires to. . . .  Ah! These conspirators" he said slowly 
with an accent of scorn. {op"}They would get hold of you in no 
time! You know Natalia Victorovna I have the greatest 
difficulty in saving myself from the superstition of an active 
providence. It's irresistible. . . .  The alternative of course 
would be the personal devil of our simple ancestors. But if 
so he has overdone it altogether{ -- }the old father of lies{ -- }our 
national patron{ -- }our domestic god whom we take with us when 
we go abroad. He has overdone it. It seems that I am not 
simple enough . . .  That's it! I ought to have known. . . .  And I 
did know it" he added in a tone of poignant distress which 
overcame my astonishment. 
.p779 
   {op"}This man is deranged" I said to myself very much frightened. 
   The next moment he gave me a very special impression beyond the 
range of commonplace definitions. It was as though he had 
stabbed himself outside and had come in there to show it{ -- }
and more than that{ -- }as though he were turning the knife in the 
wound and watching the effect. That was the impression 
rendered in physical terms. One could not 
defend oneself from a certain amount of pity. But it was for 
Miss Haldin, already so tried in her deepest affections, that 
.p780 
I felt a serious concern. Her attitude, her face express 
compassion struggling with doubt on the 
verge of terror. 
   {op"}What is it Kirylo Sidorovitch?" There was a hint of 
tenderness in that cry. He only stared at her in that 
complete surrender of all his faculties which in a happy 
person would have had the name of ecstasy. 
   {op"}Why are you looking at me like this Kirylo Sidorovitch? 
I have approached you frankly. I need at this time to see 
clearly in myself . . ." 
She ceased for a moment as if to give him an opportunity 
to utter at last some word worthy of her exalted trust 
.p781 
of her brothers friend. His 
silence became impressive like a sign of some 
momentous resolution. 
   In the end Miss Haldin went on, appealingly.
   {op"}I have waited for you anxiously. 
But now that 
you have been moved to come to us in your kindness{ -- }you 
alarm me. You speak obscurely. It seems as if you were 
keeping back something from me." 
   {op"}Tell me Natalia Victorovna" he was heard at last in a 
strange unringing voice, {op"}who did you see in that place?" 
.p782 
   She was startled{ -- }as if deceived in her 
expectations. 
   {op"}Where? At Peter Ivanovitch's rooms? There was Mr. 
Laspara and three other people." 
   {op"}Ha! The vanguard{ -- }the forlorn hope of the great plot" 
he commented to himself. {op"}Bearers of the spark to start an 
explosion which is meant to change fundamentally the life of 
so many millions in order that Peter Ivanovitch should be the 
head of a state." 
   {op"}You are testing me" she said. {op"}Our dear one told me once 
to remember that men serve always something greater than 
themselves{ -- }the idea." 
   {op"}Our dear one" he repeated slowly. The effort he made 
to appear unmoved absorbed all the force of his soul. He 
stood before her like a being with hardly a breath of life. 
.p783 
His eyes even as under great physical suffering had lost all 
their fire. {op"}Ah! your brother. . . .  but on your lips in your 
voice it sounds . . . .  and indeed in you everything is . . . .  I wish I 
could know the innermost depths of your thoughts, of your 
feelings." 
   {op"}But why, Kirylo Sidorovitch" she cried alarmed by these 
words coming out of strangely lifeless lips. 
   {op"}Have no fear. It is not to betray you. So you went 
there . . . .  And Sophia Antonovna what did she tell you then . . . " 
   {op"}She said very little really. She knew that I should 
hear everything from you. She had no time for more 
than a few words." Miss Haldin's voice dropped and she became 
silent for a moment. {op"}The man it appears has taken his life" 
.p784 
she said sadly. 
   {op"}Tell me Natalia Victorovna" he asked after a pause, {op"}do 
you believe in remorse?" 
   {op"}What a question!" 
   {op"}What can you know of it?" he muttered thickly. {op"}It is 
not for such as you. . . .  What I meant to ask was whether you 
believed in the efficacy of remorse." 
   She hesitated as though she had not understood then her 
face lighted up. 
   {op"}Yes" she said firmly. 
   {op"}So he is absolved. Moreover that Ziemianitch was a brute
{ -- }a drunken brute." 
   A shudder passed through Natalia Haldin. 
.p785 
   {op"}But a man of the people Razumov went on{ -- }{op"}to whom they, the 
revolutionists tell a tale of sublime hopes. Well the people must 
be forgiven. . . .  And you must not believe all you've heard 
from that source either" he added with a sort of sinister 
reluctance. 
   {op"}You are concealing something from me" she exclaimed. 
   {op"}Do you, Natalia Victorovna, believe in the 
duty of revenge?" 
   {op"}Listen Kirylo Sidorovitch I believe that the future will 
be merciful to us all. Revolutionist and reactionary, victim 
and executioner, betrayer and betrayed, they shall all be pitied 
together when the light breaks on our black 
.p786 
sky at last. Pitied and forgotten; for without that there can 
be no union and love." 
   {op"}I hear. No revenge for you then? Never? Not the least 
bit?" He smiled bitterly with his colourless lips. {op"}You 
yourself are like the very spirit of that merciful future. Strange 
that it does not make it easier. . . . No! But suppose that the 
real betrayer of your brother{ -- }Ziemianitch had a part in it 
too but insignificant and quite involuntary{ -- }suppose that he 
was a young man educated{ -- }an intellectual worker{ -- }thoughtful 
{ -- }a man, your brother might have trusted lightly perhaps, but 
still{ -- }suppose . . . . .  but there's a whole story there." 
   {op"}And you know the story! But why then 
   {op"}I have heard it. There is a staircase in it{ -- }and even 
.p787 
phantoms{ -- }but that does not matter if a man always serves something 
greater than himself{ -- }the idea. I wonder who is the greatest 
victim in that tale." 
   {op"}In that tale!" Miss Haldin repeated. She seemed turned 
into stone. 
   {op"}Do you know why I came to you? It is simply 
because there is no one anywhere in the whole great world, 
I could go to. Do you understand what I say? No one to go 
to. Do you conceive the desolation of the thought: no one to 
go to. . . . " 
   She was so utterly mislead by her own enthusiastic 
interpretation of two lines in the letter of a visionary, so much 
already under the spell of her own dread of lonely days in 
.p788 
their overshadowed world of angry strife, that she was a 
thousand miles from the glimpse of the truth. struggling on his lips. 
What she was 
conscious of was the obscure form of his suffering. She was 
on the point of extending her hand to him impulsively when he 
spoke again. 
   {op"}An hour after I saw you first I knew how it would be. 
The terrors of remorse, revenge, confession, anger, hate, fear 
are like nothing to the atrocious temptation which you put in 
my way the day you appeared before me with your voice, with 
your face, in the garden of that accursed villa." 
   She looked utterly bewildered for a moment, then with a 
sort of swift despair she went straight to the point. 
   {op"}The story Kirylo Sidorovitch, the story!" 
.p789 
   {op"}There is no more to tell? He made a movement forward 
and she actually put her hand on his shoulder to push him 
away but her strength failed her and he kept his ground though 
trembling in every limb. {op"}It ends here{ -- }on this very spot. 
The man stands before you." He pressed a denunciatory finger 
to his breast with force and became perfectly still. I ran 
forward snatching up the chair and was in time to catch hold 
of Miss Haldin and lower her down. As she sank into it she 
swung half round 
.p790
on my arm and remained averted from us both drooping over the 
back. He looked down at her with a horrible expressionless 
tranquility. Incredulity struggling with astonishment, anger 
and disgust deprived me of my power of speech. Then I turned on him 
speaking low from very rage. 
   {op"}This is monstrous. What are you staying for now? Don't 
let her catch sight of you again. Go away" . . . He did not budge. {op"}Don't you understand 
that your presence is horrible even to me. Youve 
behaved atrociously. If there's any sense of shame in you. 
you will go at once." 
   Slowly his big head, his sullen eyes, moved in my 
direction. {op"}How did this old man come here?" he muttered, astounded. 
   Suddenly Miss Haldin sprang up from the chair, 
.p791
without giving us a glance, made a few steps and tottered. 
Forgetting my indignation, and even the man 
himself, I hurried to her assistance. I took her by the arm, and she let 
me lead her into the drawing-room. 
Away from the lamp, in the deeper dusk of the distant end, the 
profile of Mrs. Haldin, her hands had an unearthly 
whiteness. The whole figure 
had the stillness of a sombre painting. 
Miss Haldin stopped, leaning on my arm, and without a word 
pointed mournfully at the terrible immobility of her mother, who 
seemed to watch a beloved head lying in her lap. 
   That gesture had an unequalled force of expression{ -- }
so tragic, so far-reaching in its human distress, that one 
.p792
could not believe that it pointed out merely the ruthless 
working of political institutions. After assisting Miss Haldin to 
the sofa I turned round to go back and shut the door; but, 
framed in the opening, in the searching glare of the white 
anteroom my eyes met another instructive picture. Razumov 
was still there, standing before the empty chair, as if 
rooted for ever to the spot of his atrocious confession. A wonder 
came over me that the mysterious force which had torn it 
out of him had failed to shatter his body. It was there unscathed. I could see 
the broad line of his shoulders, his dark head, the amazing 
immobility of his limbs! On the floor near his feet, 
the veil dropped by Miss Haldin looked intensely 
black in the white crudity of the light. 
He seemed to be gazing down at it spell-bound. Next 
.p793 
moment, stooping with an incredible, savage swiftness he 
snatched it up and pressed it to his face with both 
hands. Something, extreme astonishment perhaps, dimmed my eyes, 
so that he seemed to vanish before he moved. 
   The slamming of the outer door restored my sight, 
and I went on contemplating the empty chair in the empty anteroom. 
The meaning of what I had seen reached my mind with a 
staggering effect. I seized Natalia Haldin by the shoulder. 
   {op"}That miserable wretch has carried off your veil" I cried 
in the scared, deadened voice of an awful discovery. {op"}He. . . ." 
   The rest remained unspoken. I 
stepped back and looked at her confused 
and scared. Her hands were lying lifelessly, palms upwards on her lap; she raised her 
grey eyes slowly. Shadows seemed to come and go in them as 
.p794 
if the steady flame of her soul had been made to 
vacillate at last in the cross currents of poisoned air from the 
corrupted dark immensity claiming her for its own 
where virtues themselves fester into crimes in the cynicism 
of oppression and revolt. 
   {op"}It is impossible to be more unhappy .". .  The languid 
of her voice struck me with dismay. . . . {op"}I could almost wish 
myself dead. . . .  I feel my heart becoming like ice." 
.p794 
{cn}IV 
{cop}Razumov walked straight home on the wet glistening 
pavement. A shower passed over him; distant lightning 
played faintly against the fronts of the dumb houses with the shuttered 
shops all along the Rue de Carouge; and now and then after the 
.p795 
faint flash there was a faint sleepy rumble; but the main 
forces of the thunderstorm remained massed down the Rhone 
valley as if loath to attack the respectable and passionless 
abode of democratic liberty, the serious-minded town of 
dreary hotels, tendering the same indifferent, secretly 
scornful, hospitality to tourists of all nations and to 
international conspirators of every shade. 
   The owner of the shop was making ready to close when Razumov 
entered and without word extended his hand for the key of his 
room. On reaching it for him from a shelf the man was about to pass a small 
joke as to taking the air in a thunderstorm, but, after looking at 
the face of his lodger, he only observed, just to say something. 
   {op"}You've got wet." 
.p796 
   {op"}It's nothing" muttered Razumov and passed through the inner 
door towards the staircase leading to his room. 
   He did not change his clothes but after lighting the 
candle took off his watch and chain laid it on the table and 
sat down at once to write. The book of his compromising record 
was kept in a locked drawer which he pulled out violently and 
did not even trouble to push back afterwards. 
   In this queer pedantism of a man who had read, thought, 
lived pen in hand there is the sincerity of the attempt to 
grapple by the same means with another knowledge. After some 
passages which have been already made use of in the building 
up of this narrative or add nothing new to the psychological 
side of this disclosure (there is even an allusion to the 
.p797 
silver medal) comes a page and a half of incoherent writing 
where his expression is baffled by the novelty and the 
mysteriousness of that side of our emotional life to which his 
solitary existence was a stranger. Then only he begins to 
address directly the reader he had in his mind trying to tell 
in broken sentences full of wonder and awe of the sovereign 
(he uses that very word) power of her person over his 
imagination in which lay the dormant seed of her brother's words. 
 . . . .  The most trustful eyes in the world{ -- }he said 
of you when he was as well as a dead man already. 
And when you stood before me offering your hand I remembered 
the very sound of his voice and I looked into them{ -- }and that was enough. 
I knew that something had happened but I did not know then 
.p798 
what . . .  But don't be deceived Natalia Niktorovna. I 
thought I had in my breast nothing but an 
inexhaustible fund of anger and hate for you. I remembered that he had looked to you 
for the perpetuation of his visionary soul. He had robbed me of my hard working 
purposeful existence. I too had my idea; and remember that amongst us 
it is more difficult to lead such a life than to go out in the street and 
kill from conviction. But enough of that. Hate or no hate I know that 
while shunning the sight of you I could never succeed in 
driving away your image. I would say addressing that dead man:{ -- }
   {op"}Is this the way you are going to haunt me?" It is only 
later that I understood{ -- }only to day, only a few hours ago. What could 
I have known of what was tearing me to pieces and dragging the 
secret for ever to my lips. 
You were appointed to undo the evil by making 
me betray myself back into truth and peace. You! And in 
the same way too{ -- }by forcing upon me your confidence. Only what I 
.p799 
detested him for, in you ended by appearing noble and exalted. But be not 
deceived. I exulted in having induced that silly 
innocent fool to steal his father's money. He was a fool 
but not a thief. I made him one. It was necessary. I had to 
confirm myself in my contempt and hate 
for what I betrayed. I have had as many vipers in 
my heart as any social democrat of them all{ -- }vanity, ambitions, 
jealousies, shameful desires, evil passions of envy and revenge. I had 
my security stolen from me, years of good work, 
my best hopes? Listen{ -- }now comes the true confession. The 
other was nothing. To save me your trustful eyes had to entice 
me to the very edge of the blackest treachery. I could see them constantly 
looking at me with the confidence of your pure heart that had 
.p800 
not been touched by evil things. Victor Haldin had stolen the truth 
of my life from me who had nothing else in the world and he boasted 
of living on through you on this earth where I had no 
place to lay my head on. She will marry some day he had said{ -- }and your 
eyes were trustful. And do you know what I said to 
myself? I shall steal his sister's soul from her. When we 
met that first morning in the gardens and you spoke to me confidingly in the 
generosity of your spirit I was thinking: he has delivered her into 
my hands! If you could have looked then into my heart you 
would have cried out with horror and shame. 
   Perhaps no one will believe such an intention. It's certain 
that when we parted that morning 
I gloated over it. I brooded upon the best way. That 
old man walked with me. I don't know who he is. He 
.p801 
talked of you, of your lonely, helpless state, and every 
word of that friend of yours was egging me on. Could it have 
been the devil in the shape of an old Englishman. Natalia 
Victorovna I was possessed! I came to look at you 
every day, and poison myself with the plans 
of my infamous intention. But I foresaw 
difficulties. Then Sophia Antonovna of whom I was not 
thinking{ -- }I had forgotten her existence{ -- }appears suddenly 
with that tale from St. Petersburg. . . .  The only thing needed to make 
me safe{ -- }a trusted revolutionist for ever. 
   It was as if Ziemianitch had hanged himself on purpose. The 
.p802 
strength of falsehood seemed irresistible. These people were 
doomed by the folly and the illusion that was in them, being 
themselves the slaves of lies. Natalia Viktorovna, I embraced 
it, I exulted in it{ -- }I gave myself up to it for a time. Who 
could have resisted! You yourself were the prize of it. I 
sat alone in my room planning a life the very thought of 
which makes me shudder now like a believer tempted to a 
sacrilege. But I brooded ardently over its images. The only 
thing was that there seemed to be no air in it. And also I 
was afraid of your mother. I never knew mine. I've never knewn 
any kind of love. There is something in the mere word. . . . 
Of you I was not afraid{ -- }forgive me for telling you this. No
not of you. You are truth itself. You could not suspect me 
.p803 
As to your mother you yourself feared already that her mind 
had given way from grief. Who could believe anything 
against me? Had not Ziemianitch hanged 
himself{ -- }from remorse? I said to myself: {op"}Let's put it to the test and 
be done with it once for all. I trembled when 
I went in; but your mother hardly listened to what I was 
telling her, and in a little while seemed to have forgotten 
my very existence. I sat looking at her. There was no 
longer anything between you and me. You were 
defenceless{ -- }and soon very soon you would be alone. . . . 
I thought of you. Defenceless. Pardon this presumption. For 
days you have talked with me{ -- }opening your heart. I remembered
the shadow of your eyelashes over your gray trustful eyes. And 
your pure forehead! It is low like the forehead of statues{ -- }calm 
unstained. It was as if it bore a light which fell on me 
and searched my heart. Your light! Your truth. I felt I must never 
see you again. But where could I go? Nothing, nowhere, 
no one. And then suddenly you stood before me! And then 
you stood before me. You alone in all the world 
to whom I could confess. You fascinated 
.p804 
{ -- }you have freed me from the 
blindness of anger and hate{ -- }the truth in you drew the truth out of me. 
Now I have done it; and as I write here I am profoundly unhappy 
but there is air at last{ -- }air. And by the bye that old man sprang up from 
somewhere just now and raged at me like a disappointed 
devil. I suffer horribly, but I am not in despair. 
There is only one more thing to do for me. After that{ -- }if they let me{ -- }
I shall go away and bury myself in obscure misery.
In giving Victor Haldin up, it was myself after 
all that I have betrayed most basely. You must believe me, you can't refuse 
to believe this. Most basely. It is through you that 
I came to feel this so deeply. Therefore it is they and 
not I who have the right on their side{ -- }
the strength of invisible powers. So be it. Only don't 
.p805 
be deceived Natalia Victorovna. I am 
not converted. Have I then the soul of a 
slave? No! I am independent{ -- }and therefore 
perdition is my lot." 
   On these words he stopped writing, shut the book and 
wrapped round it the black veil he had carried off; then he ransacked the drawers 
for paper and string, made up a parcel which he addressed to Miss Haldin, 
Boulevard des Philosophes, and then flung the pen away from him 
into a distant corner. 
   This done he sat down with the watch before him. He 
could have gone out at once but the hour had not struck. The 
hour would be midnight. There was no reason for that choice 
except that the facts and the words of a certain evening in 
his past timed his conduct in the present. The sudden 
power Natalia Haldin had gained over him at the very first 
sight he ascribed to the sane cause. {op"}You don't walk with 
.p806 
impunity over a phantom's breast" he heard himself mutter. 
{op"}Thus he saves me" he thought suddenly. {op"}He himself, the 
betrayed man. The vivid image of Miss Haldin seemed to stand by him 
watching him relentlessly. She was not disturbing. 
He had done with life and his thought even in her presence tried 
to take an impartial survey. Now his scorn extended to 
himself. {op"}I had neither the simplicity, nor the courage nor the 
self-possession to be a scoundrel{ -- }or an exceptionally able man{ -- }
for who with us, in Russia, is to tell a scoundrel from an 
exceptionally able man. . . .
   He was the puppet of his past; because at the very stroke 
of midnight he jumped up and ran headlong downstairs with no 
thought of his latchkey as if confident that by the power of 
destiny the house door would fly open before the absolute necessity of his errand. And as a 
matter of fact just as he got to the bottom of the stairs it 
was opened for him by some people of to 
the house coming home late{ -- }two men and a 
.p807 
a woman. He slipped out through them into the 
street swept then by a fitful gust of wind. They were of course very much startled. A 
flash of lightning enabled them to observe him walking away quickly.
One of the men shouted and was starting in pursuit but the woman had 
recognised him. {op"}It's that young Russian from the third floor." 
The darkness returned with a single clap of 
thunder, like a gun fired for a warning of his 
escape from the prison of lies. 
   He must have heard at some time or other and now remembered unconsciously that 
there was to be a gathering of revolutionists at the house of 
Julius Laspara that evening. At any rate he made straight for the 
Laspara house and found himself without surprise before its street door which of 
course was closed. By that time the thunderstorm had attacked 
in earnest. The steep incline of the street ran with water, the 
thick fall of rain swirled round him like  a luminous veil in the play of lightning. 
He was perfectly calm and between the crashes listened attentively to the delicate tinkling 
.p808 
of the bell somewhere within the house. 
   There was some difficulty before he was admitted. His 
person was not known to that one of the guests who had 
volunteered to go down and see what was the matter. Razumov argued with him 
patiently. There could be no harm in admitting a caller. He had 
something to communicate to the company upstairs. 
   {op"}Of importance?" 
   {op"}That'll be for the hearers to judge." 
   {op"}Urgent?" 
   {op"}Without a moment's delay." 
   In the end one of the Laspara daughters descended the stairs small lamp in hand, in a clear begrimed gown, which seemed to hang on her by a miracle, and looking more 
than ever like an old doll with a dusty brown wig, dragged from 
under a sofa. She recognised Razumov at once. 
   { -- }{op"}How do you do. Of course you may 
come in. 
.p809 
   Following her light Razumov climbed two 
flights of stairs from the lower darkness. Leaving 
the lamp on a bracket on the landing she 
opened a door and went in accompanied by the sceptical guest. 
   Razumov entered last. He closed the door behind him 
and stepping on one side put his back against the wall. 
   The three little rooms {op"}en suite" with low 
smoky ceilings and lit by paraffin lamps were very full. Loud talking was going 
on in all three, and tea-glasses, full, half-full and empty stood everywhere, even on
the floor. The other Laspara girl sat behind an enormous samovar. In 
the inner doorway Razumov had a glimpse of the protuberance of a large stomach which he 
recognised. Only a few feet from him Julius Laspara was 
getting down from his high stool. 
   The appearance of the midnight guest caused some sensation. 
.p810 
Laspara is very summary in his version of that night's happenings. After some words of greeting 
disregarded by Razumov, Laspara (ignoring purposely his guest's soaked condition and his 
extraordinary manner of presenting himself) mentioned something about 
writing an article. He was growing uneasy and Razumov appeared absent minded 
{op"}I have written already all I shall ever write" he said at last with a little laugh. 
   Everybody's attention in that room was turned to the 
newcomer, dripping with water, deadly pale and keeping 
his position against the wall. Razumov put Laspara gently 
aside as though he wished to be seen from head to foot by 
everybody. By then the buzz of conversations had died down 
completely even in the most distant of the three rooms. The doorway facing 
Razumov became blocked by people who craned their necks 
and certainly seemed to expect something to happen. 
   A squeaky declaration was heard from there. 
.p811 
   {op"}I know the individual." 
   {op"}What individual" asked Razumov raising his bowed head and searching with his eyes, all 
the eyes fixed upon him. An intense surprised silence lasted for a time. {op"}If it's 
me. . . . " 
   He stopped thinking over the form of his confession{ -- }and 
found it suddenly, unavoidably suggested by the fateful evening 
of his life. 
   {op"}I am come here" he began in a clear voice, {op"}to talk 
of an individual called Ziemianitch. Sophia Antonovna has 
informed me that she would make public a certain letter from 
Petersburg. . . . " 
   {op"}Sophia Ivanovna has left us early in the evening," said 
Laspara. {op"}It's quite correct. Everybody here. . . ." 
.p812 
   {op"}Very well" Razumov interrupted with a shade of impatience
for his heart was beating strongly. Then mastering his voice 
so far that there was even a taint of irony in his clear 
forcible enunciation. 
   {op"}In justice to that individual, the much ill used peasant 
Ziemianitch, I now declare solemnly that the conclusions of 
that letter calumniate a man of the people{ -- }a bright Russian soul. He 
had nothing to do with the actual arrest of Victor Haldin." 
   Razumov dwelt on the name heavily, and then waited till the faint 
mournful murmur which greeted it had died out. 
   {op"}Victor Victorovitch Haldin acting with no doubt noble-minded 
imprudence took refuge with a certain student of whose opinions 
he knew nothing but what his  illusions suggested. It 
was no doubt a generous display of confidence. But I 
.p813 
am not here to appreciate the actions of Victor Haldin. 
Am I to tell you of the feelings of 
that student sought out in his obscure 
solitude and menaced by the complicity forced 
upon him? Am I to tell you what he did? It's a complicated 
affair. In the end he went to General T{---}
himself and said: {op"}I have the man who killed P{---}locked 
up in my room. Victor Haldin{ -- }a student." 
   A great buzz arose in which Razumov raised his voice. 
   {op"}Observe{ -- }that man had certain honest ideals in view. But I 
did n't come here to explain him." 
   {---}{op"}No. But you must explain how you know all this"{ -- }came
in grave tones from somebody. 
   {op"}Vile coward!" This cry vibrated indignation. {op"}Name!" shouted 
other voices 
   {---}{op"}What are you clamouring for?" said Razumov disdainfully in the profound 
silence which fell at the raising of his hand. {op"}Haven't 
you all understood that I am the man" 
   Laspara went away brusquely from his side and climbed upon his stool. In the first surge of of
people towards him Razumov expected to be torn to pieces, but they fell back and nothing came of it but 
.p814 
noise. It bewildered him. His head ached terribly. All he could make out was 
the name of Peter Ivanovitch, the word Judgement" 
and the phrase {op"}But this a confession" uttered by 
somebody in a desperate shout. In the midst of 
that uproar a young man{ -- }younger than himself approached 
him with blazing eyes. 
   {op"}I must beg you" he said with venomous politeness, {op"}to 
be good enough not to move from this spot till you are told 
what you are to do." 
   Razumov shrugged his shoulders. 
   {op"}I came voluntarily. 
   {op"}May be. But you won't go till you are permitted" retorted the 
other. 
   He beckoned calling out {op"}Louisa! Louisa! Here please"{ -- }and, presently, one of the 
Laspara girls (they had been staring at Razumov from behind the samovar) came along 
trailing a bedraggled tail of dirty flounces and dragging with her 
.p815 
a chair, which she set against the door and sitting down on it 
crossed her legs. The young man thanked her effusively and 
rejoined a group discussing hotly. Razumov lost himself for 
a moment. 
   A shrill voice screamed. {op"}Confession or no confession he's a police spy." 
   The revolutionist Nikita had pushed his way in front of Razumov
and faced him with his big livid face, his heavy
paunch, bull neck and enormous hands. Razumov looked at 
the famous slayer 
of gendarmes in silent disgust. 
   {op"}And you?" he said very low, and shut his eyes, upright 
the back of his head against the wall. 
   {op"}It would be better for you to depart" said in a mild 
sad voice an elderly man with a great brush of hair and beard 
.p816 
making like a halo of hairs all round his keen intelligent face. 
{op"}Peter Ivanovitch shall be informed of your confession{ -- }and 
you shall be directed. . . . " 
   Then turning to Nikita nicknamed Necator, he murmured, 
{op"}What else can we do?
His sincerity apart, he can not be dangerous any longer." 
   The other muttered {op"}Better make sure of that before we 
let him go.  Leave that to me."
   He exchanged meaning glances with two or three men who nodded 
slightly, then turning roughly to Razumov{ -- }
{op"}You heard?  You are not wanted here. Why don't you get 
out?" 
   The Laspara girl on guard rose and pulled the chair out 
of the way unemotionally.  She gave a stony stare to
Razumov who passed slowly out as if in deep thought.
   {op"}I beg you to observe" he said turning in the doorway {op"}that I had 
.p817 
only to hold my tongue. Today of all days since I cam amongst 
you I was made safe{ -- }and today I have made myself free from
falsehood, from remorse{ -- }independent of every single human being on this 
earth." 
   He turned his back on the room and walked 
toward the stairs but at the violent crash of the door behind him he looked over his shoulder
and saw that Nikita with three others had followed him on the landing. {op"}They
are going to kill me after all" he thought. 
   As he turned to face them they set on him, drove him suddenly against the wall.
{op"}I wonder how" he finished his thought. Nikita said 
with a shrill laugh {op"}We shall make him harmless." 
   Razumov did not struggle. The three men held him pinned against the
wall while Nikita taking up his position and deliberately
swung off his enormous arm. Razumov looking for a knife in
his hand saw it open, unarmed{ -- }and
.p818 
received a tremendous blow on the side of his head over his ear: 
At the same time heard a faint dull detonating sound as if someone 
had fired a pistol on the other side of the wall. A raging
fury awoke in him It was then that the people in Laspara's rooms held 
their breath listening to the desperate scuffling of four men all 
over the landing; thuds against the walls, a terrible crash against the very  door{ -- } 
then a fall of several men going down together
with a violence which shook the floor under their feet. 
Razumov overpowered, crushed, breathless under the weight of his assailants 
saw the monstrous Nikita squatting on his heels near his head 
while the others held him down, kneeling on his chest,
gripping his throat, lying across his legs. 
   {op"}Turn his face the other way" the paunchy terrorist 
directed. 
   Razumov could struggle no longer.  He was exhausted{ -- }and, passive, he had
to watch the heavy open hand swung
off, and descending again in a degrading blow.
.p819 
It seemed to crush his head{ -- }and all at once the men holding him became 
perfectly silent. In silence they pulled him brutally to his feet, rushed him headlong down 
the staircase and opening the door flung him out violently 
into the street. 
   He fell on his face and at once rolled helplessly down the 
short slope over and over with the rush of running water{ -- }
and came to a rest in the roadway of the street at the bottom
on his back with a great flash of lightning 
in his eyes{ -- }a vivid silent flash of lightning that blinded 
him utterly. He picked himself up and put his arm over his 
eyes to recover his sight. Not a sound reached him from anywhere.
He walked on, down a long empty 
street. The lightning waved and darted round his its silent 
flames, the water of the deluge fell, ran, leaped, drove, noiseless 
like the drift of mist. In this unearthly silence his 
.p820 
footsteps too fell silent on the pavement, while a mute wind 
drove him on and on like a lost mortal in a phantom world 
ravaged by a soundless thunderstorm. God only knows where his 
noiseless feet took him to that night, here and there, and back again, of one 
place at least where they did lead him we heard afterwards; 
and in the morning the driver of the first south shore tramcar 
clanging his bell desperately saw a bedraggled, soaked man without 
a hat, walking in the roadway unsteadily with his head down, step right in front of his 
car and go under. 
   When they picked him up with two broken limbs and a crushed side he had not lose 
consciousness. It was as though he had tumbled smashing himself into a world 
of mutes. Silent men moving unheard lifted him up, laid 
him on a stretcher gesticulated and grimaced round him. Their 
.p821 
alarm, horror and compassion. A red face with moustaches 
stooped close over him lips moving, eyes rolling. 
Razumov tried to understand. To those who stood around 
him the face of that man so grievously hurt wore an air of 
meditation. Afterwards his eyes had a look of fear which passed away. 
Razumov was trying to remember some French words. 
   {op"}Ils m'ont fait sourd he had time to exclaim feebly before he lost consciousness.  
   They carried him off in the very car. Before it started on its journey 
a woman in a shabby black dress, who 
had run out of the iron gate of some grounds up the road 
clambered onto the rear platform and would not be put off. 
   {op"}I am a relation"{ -- }she protested in bad French. {op"}He is 
a Russian and I am his relation". 
   On this ground they let her have her way. She sat calmly 
down and took his head on her lap. Her scared eyes 
avoided looking at his deathlike face. At the corner of a street on 
the other side of the town a stretcher met the car. She followed 
it to the door of the hospital where they let 
her come in and see him laid on a bed. Razumov's 
new found relation never shed a tear but there was a 
difficulty in making her go away. The porter observed her 
lingering on the opposite pavement for a long time. 
Suddenly she ran off. 
.p821 
{pt}Part IV 
{cn}V 
{cop}It was nearly a week after her 
mother's funeral that I saw Natalia 
Haldin for the last time. 
   In those heavy last days the doors of the 
appartement on the Boulevard des Philosophes 
were closed to everyone but myself. I 
trust I was of some use if only in this 
that I alone was aware of the incredible part of the situation. 
Miss Haldin nursed her mother to 
the last. If Razumov's visit had 
anything to do with Mrs Haldin's end 
(and I can not help thinking that it hastened 
it considerably) it is because he failed to gain 
the confidence of Victor Haldin's mother. 
What precisely he told her can not be 
known{ -- }at any rate I do not know it{ -- }
but she seemed to die from an 
ultimate disappointment borne in 
silence. She had not believed him. 
Perhaps she could not believe any one and 
consequently she had nothing to say to any one{ -- }not 
even to her daughter. I suspect 
that Miss Haldin went through a 
.p822 
heavy trial by that silent death-
bed. I confess I was angry with 
the broken hearted old woman passing away in the 
obstinate silence of suspicion. 
   When it was all over I stood aside. Miss 
Haldin had her compatriots round her 
then. A great number of them attended the 
funeral. I was there too but afterwards 
managed to keep away till I received a short 
note rewarding my self sacrifice {op"}It is 
as you would have it. I am going 
back to Russia at once. My mind is 
made up." 
   Verily it was a reward. I went without 
delay to receive it. The appartement 
of the Boulevard des philosophes presented the 
dreary signs of impending abandonment. 
It looked desolate and as if already 
empty, to my eyes. 
   Standing we exchanged a few 
.p823 
a few words, her health, mine, 
remarks as some people of the 
Russian colony; and then Natalia 
Haldin establishing me on the sofa 
talked openly of her future work of 
her plans. It was all to be as 
I had wished it for her. And it was 
to be for life. We would never see 
each other again. 
   I gathered the reward to my breast. 
Natalia Haldin looked matured by her 
trials. With her arms folded she 
walked up and down the whole length of 
the room talking slowly, smooth-browed, with a 
resolute profile. It was a new view 
of her for me and I wondered at 
that something grave and measured 
in her voice, in her movements, 
in her manner. It was a mood 
of collected independence. The strength 
of her character had come to 
surface because the obscure 
.p824 
depths had been stirred. 
   {---}{op"}We two can talk of it now" she 
said after a silence and stopping 
short before me. {op"}Have you been to see 
him lately?" 
   {op"}Yes!" I said. And as she looked 
at me fixedly. {op"}He will live, they 
say. But I thought that Tekla . . .
   {---}{op"}Tekla has not been near me for 
several days" explained Mrs Haldin quietly. 
{op"}She wanted me to go to the hospital with her. She 
thinks now that I have no heart. She is 
disillusioned about me". 
   And Miss Haldin smiled faintly 
   {op"}Yes. She is with him as often as they will 
let her. She says she will never 
abandon him as long as she lives. He'll 
need somebody{ -- }a hopeless 
cripple, and stone deaf with that. 
.p825 
{op"}Stone deaf? I didn't know" 
murmured Natalia Haldin. 
   {op"}Yes. It is strange as there were no 
apparent injuries to the head" I 
said, {op"}And it is possible too that he won't 
live so very long after for Tekla 
to take care of him. 
   While there are travellers fated to fall 
wounded by the way our Tekla will never lack 
occupation. She is a good samaritan 
by an irresistible vocation 
They did n't understand her. Fancy 
a devoted creature like that being employed to carry 
secret documents sown in her 
dress or made to write from 
dictation! 
   {---}{op"}There is not much perspicacity in the 
world" 
   No sooner uttered I regretted 
that observation. Natalia 
.p826 
Haldin looking me straight 
in the face assented 
by a slight movement of her head.  She 
was not offended but turning 
away began to pace the room 
again. And as I followed her 
with my eyes she seemed to 
be getting further and further 
away, quite beyond my reach 
now but 
undiminished in the increasing 
distance. I remained silent 
as though it were hopeless 
to raise my voice. The sound 
of her so close to me made 
me start a little. 
   {---}{op"}Tekla saw him picked up after 
the accident? The good soul 
never explained to me really 
how it came about. She said 
there was some understanding 
between them{ -- }some sort 
.p827 
of compact . . . That in any sore 
need, in misfortune or difficulty 
or pain he would come to her." 
   {---}{op"}Was there? I said. {op"}It's lucky 
for him that there was then. He'll need 
all the devotion of the 
good Samaritan". 
   It was a fact that Tekla looking 
out of her window at half past 
in the morning, for some reason 
or other, had seen Razumov in 
the grounds of the Chateau 
Borel stock still in the rain 
at the foot of the terrace. 
She had screamed out 
to him, by name, to know 
what was the matter. He 
never even raised his head. 
By the time she had dressed 
herself sufficiently to run 
out he was gone. She 
started in pursuit and 
rushing out into the road 
.p828 
saw the arrested tram-
car and the small knot of people 
picking up Razumov. That much 
Tekla had told me herself and 
without any kind of comment. 
But I did not want to 
meditate very long on the  
inwardness of this strange story 
   {op"}Yes Natalia Viktorovna. He 
shall need somebody when 
they dismiss him on crutches 
and stone deaf from the 
hospital. But when he 
rushed like an escaped mad-
man into the grounds of 
the Chateau Borel it 
was not to seek the help 
of that good Tekla. 
   {---}{op"}No! she said stopping short 
before me. {op"}Perhaps not". She 
.p829 
down and leaned her head 
on her hand. 
   The silence lasted 
for several minutes. During 
that time I remembered her 
words, the plaint she seemed 
to have hardly enough life left 
in her to utter:  {op"}It is 
impossible to be more unhappy". 
The recollection would have given 
me a shudder if I had not been 
lost in wonder at her force 
and her tranquillity. There was 
no longer any Natalia Haldin 
because she had completely ceased 
to think of herself. It was a great victory,  
a characteristically 
Russian exploit in self 
suppression. 
   She interrupted my thoughts 
of her by getting up suddenly 
like a person who had 
.p830 
come to a decision. She 
walked to the writing table 
now stripped of all the small 
objects associated with her by 
daily use{ -- }a mere piece of 
hired furniture; but it 
contained something still, since 
she took from some recess 
a flat parcel which she brought 
to me. 
   {---}{op"}It's a book" she said rather 
abruptly. {op"}It was sent to me. I did 
not tell you at the time, but now 
I've decided to give it to you. I have the right 
to do that. It is mine. You may 
keep it, or destroy it. You shall 
certainly read it. And when you 
read it please remember that 
I {it}was{ro} defenceless. 
   {---}{op"}Defenceless" I asked surprised 
looking hard at her. 
   {---}{op"}You'll find the word 
.p831 
written there" she whispered. "well 
it's true! I was defenceless . . .
But perhaps you knew that 
yourself . . ." 
   Her face coloured, then{ -- }went 
dealy pale. 
   {---}{op"}In justice to the man, remember 
that". 
   I rose. 
   {---}{op"}I am not likely to forget." 
   Her hand fell into mine. 
   {---}{op"}It's difficult to believe that 
one must say good bye to you." 
   She returned my pressure and 
our hands separated 
{ -- }{op"}Yes. I am leaving here tomorrow 
.p832 
My eyes are open at last and my 
hands are free now. As for 
the rest which of us can fail to 
hear the stiffled cry of the 
great distress. It may be nothing 
to the world . . .
   {---}{op"}The world is more attentive to 
discordant voices" I said. 
   {---}{op"}Yes" she bowed her head in assent, 
and hesitated for a moment . . . {op"}I 
will own to you that I have been 
thinking of the time when they 
are silenced. The tempest of 
execrations is over. All is still. Perhaps 
these men united at last! taking conscience of the ended
contest will feel 
saddened because many ideas 
must perish for the triumph of 
one. So many beliefs shall have 
abandonned them! They will 
.p833 
alone and gather close together. But 
at last the anguish of hearts 
shall be extinguished in love". 
   And on this word so sweet 
so bitter, so cruel sometimes, 
I said good bye to her. It is 
hard to think I shall 
never look any more into the trustful eyes of that girl wedded 
to an invincible belief in 
the advent of rigteousness in love and 
concord springing like a 
heavenly flower from the soil 
of our earth soaked in blood, 
torn by struggles, watered 
with tears. 
{* * *} 
   It must be understood that 
at the time I did know nothing 
of Mr Razumov's confession to 
the assembled revolutionists. 
Natalia Haldin might have 
.p834 
guessed that this was the 
{op"}one thing more" which 
remained for him to do 
   Tekla the ex-lady companion
Mme. de S{---}
attended him in the hospital 
we met once or twice at 
the door of that establishment 
but on these occasions she was not communicative. She gave me news of Mr Razumov. 
He was making a slow recovery 
and would remain a great 
cripple all his life. Personally
I never went near him; 
I never saw him again after 
the evening when I was 
the ignored spectator of his scene with 
Miss Haldin. He was in due 
course discharged from the 
hospital and his {op"}relative" 
{ -- }so I was told{ -- }had carried 
him off 
.p835 
   My information was completed 
nearly two years later on 
an opportunity certainly 
not of my seeking. It came 
about that I met a much 
trusted woman revolutionist 
at the house of a distinguished 
Russian gentleman of liberal 
convictions. 
   He was a quite different sort of celebrity 
from Peter Ivanovitch. He was 
a brown haired man with kindly 
eyes, highshouldered, courteous and 
with something circumspect in his 
manner. He approached me, 
choosing the moment when 
there was no one near followed 
by a grey-haired. alert lady in 
a crimson blouse. 
   {---}{op"}Our Sophia Antonovna wished 
.p836 
to be made known to you" he 
explained in his indulgent voice. 
{op"}And so I leave you to have a talk 
together." 
   {---}{op"}I would never have intuded myself  upon your notice the 
greyhaired lady began at once 
{op"} If I had not been charged with a message 
from you". 
   It was a message of a few friendly words from Natalia Haldin. Sophia 
Antonovna had just returned 
from a secret excursion into Russia 
and had seen Miss Haldin. She 
lived in a town {op"}in the
centre" sharing her time between 
the horrors of overcrowded jails and 
the heartrending misery of 
ruined homes. She did not spare herself in
that service, Sophia Antonovna assured me. 
   She has a faithful soul, an 
undaunted spirit and an 
indefatigable body" the woman 
.p837 
Revolutionist summed it 
all up with a touch of enthusiasm 
   A conversation thus engaged was 
not likely to drop from 
want of interest on my part. We went and sat together in a corner where 
no one interrupted us. In the course of 
our talk about Miss Haldin Sophia  
Antonovna remarked suddenly 
   {---}{op"}I suppose you remember seeing me before 
one evening when Natalia came to 
get from Peter Ivanonvitch The 
address of a certan Razumov 
the young man who . . .
   {op"}I remember perfectly" I said. 
And when Sophia Antonovna heard 
that I had in my possession that 
young man's journal given me 
by Miss Haldin, she became 
greatly interested without any 
concealment whatever of her 
.p838 
curiosity to see that document 
   I offered to show it to her and she 
at once proposed to call on me 
next day for that purpose. 
   She turned the pages avidly for 
an hour or more and then returned 
me the book with a slight sigh. she 
had seen Razumov too. He lived 
not {op"}in the centre" but in the South 
She described to me a little wooden 
two roomed house in the suburb of some very small 
town, with a yard overgrown with 
thistles. He was crippled ,ill, getting weaker 
everyday, and Tekla his samaritan was 
tending him with complete 
devotion. There was nothing in that 
work to become disillusioned about. 
   I expressed my surprise that 
she should have visited Mr
Razumov. But she informed 
.p839 
me that she was not the only 
one. 
   {---}{op"}Some of {it}us{ro} always go to see him when 
passing through. He is intelligent. He has 
ideas . . . 
   It was only then that I heard of 
Razumov's public confession 
in Laspara's house. She gave me 
a detailed relation of what 
had occurred. It seems 
Razumov himself told her. 
   Then looking hard at me 
with her brilliant black eyes 
   {---}{op"}There are moments of weakness 
in every life. A false suggestion enters 
one's brain and then fear is 
born{ -- }fear of oneself, fear for 
oneself. Or else a false courage? 
who knows? How many would 
deliver themselves up to 
.p840 
to perdition as he himself calls it in that 
book, rather than go on living debased 
in their own eyes? 
How many? And please mark this{ -- }he was 
safe when he did it. It was just 
when he believed himself safe that he 
discovered that his bitterest railing could 
not cover the ignominy 
of the existence before him. There's 
character in such a discovery. 
   I accepted her conclusion in 
silence. Who would care to question 
the grounds of forgiveness or 
compassion? However it appeared 
later on that there was some 
compunction too in the charity 
extended to Razumov. Sophia 
Antonovna spoke uneasily, 
.p841 
   {---}{op"}And then you know, he was 
the victim of an outrage. Nikita 
who burst the drums of his ears 
purposely out on the landing 
in the excess apparently of 
indignation{ -- }Well he was a 
scoundrel of the worst kind{ -- }a 
traitor, a betrayer{ -- }a spy himself. 
Razumov told me he charged him 
with it by a sort of inspiration . . . 
   {---}{op"}I had a glimpse of the brute" I 
said. {op"}How any of you could have 
been deceived for half a day . ! .
   She interrupted me. 
   {op"}There! There. The first time I saw 
him I was appalled. We were 
always telling each other {op"} Oh you
musn't mind his appearance". He 
killed. Yes! In both camps". 
   And Sophia Antonovna after 
.p842 
mastering her angry indignation told 
me a strange of story. Councillor 
Mikulin travelling in Switzerland 
(shortly after Razumov's disappearance
from Geneva met Peter Ivanovitch 
in a railway carriage. They talked
together half the night, these two, and it was
then that Mikulin the Police chief
gave a hint to the Archrevolutionist 
as to the true character of the arch slayer 
of gendarmes. It is clear that Mikulin 
wanted to get rid of that particular 
agent of his own! He might have grown
tired of him, or frightened of him. It 
must also be said that he had
inherited the sinister Necator from 
his predecessor in office. 
   And this story tool received
without comment in my character 
of a mute witness of things Russian 
unrolling their eastern
logic before my Western eyes. But I 
permitted myself a question 
.p843 
   Tell me please Sophia Antonovna 
did Mme S{---} leave her fortune 
to Peter Ivanovitch." 
   {---}{op"}Not a bit of it." The woman 
revolutionist shrugged her shoulders in disgust.
{op"}She never made a will. A lot of nephews and nieces
came down like
a flock of vultures. All Kammerherrs
and maids of honour{ -- }abominable
court-flunkeys. 
   {op"}One does not hear much of Peter 
Ivanovitch now" I remarked. 
   {---}{op"}Peter Ivanovitch said Sophia Antonovna
gravely {op"}has united himself to a peasant girl" 
   I was truly astonished. 
   {---}{op"}What! On the Riviera?" 
   {---}{op"}What nonsense! Of course not." 
.p844 
   Sophia Antovna's tone was slightly 
tart. 
   {---}{op"}Is he then living actually in Russia. It's a tremendous 
risk{ -- }isn't it" I cried. {op"}And 
all for a peasant girl." 
   She preserved a mysterious silence for a while, 
then made a statement. 
   {---}{op"}He just simply adores her." 
   {---}{op"}Does he? Well, then, I hope that she will
take to beating him." 
   Sophia Antonova rose and wished
me good bye as though she had not 
heard but a word of this: but
in the very doorway 
where I attended her, She turned 
round for an instant and declared in a firm voice. 
   {---}{op"}Peter Ivanovitch is 
a wonderful man". 
-THE END-







